                                     350 BC

                                   ON DREAMS

                                  by Aristotle

                           translated by J. I. Beare

                                 1

  WE must, in the next place, investigate the subject of the dream,
and first inquire to which of the faculties of the soul it presents
itself, i.e. whether the affection is one which pertains to the
faculty of intelligence or to that of sense-perception; for these
are the only faculties within us by which we acquire knowledge.

  If, then, the exercise of the faculty of sight is actual seeing,
that of the auditory faculty, hearing, and, in general that of the
faculty of sense-perception, perceiving; and if there are some
perceptions common to the senses, such as figure, magnitude, motion,
&c., while there are others, as colour, sound, taste, peculiar [each
to its own sense]; and further, if all creatures, when the eyes are
closed in sleep, are unable to see, and the analogous statement is
true of the other senses, so that manifestly we perceive nothing
when asleep; we may conclude that it is not by sense-perception we
perceive a dream.

  But neither is it by opinion that we do so. For [in dreams] we not
only assert, e.g. that some object approaching is a man or a horse
[which would be an exercise of opinion], but that the object is
white or beautiful, points on which opinion without sense-perception
asserts nothing either truly or falsely. It is, however, a fact that
the soul makes such assertions in sleep. We seem to see equally well
that the approaching figure is a man, and that it is white. [In
dreams], too, we think something else, over and above the dream
presentation, just as we do in waking moments when we perceive
something; for we often also reason about that which we perceive.
So, too, in sleep we sometimes have thoughts other than the mere
phantasms immediately before our minds. This would be manifest to
any one who should attend and try, immediately on arising from
sleep, to remember [his dreaming experience]. There are cases of
persons who have seen such dreams, those, for example, who believe
themselves to be mentally arranging a given list of subjects according
to the mnemonic rule. They frequently find themselves engaged in
something else besides the dream, viz. in setting a phantasm which
they envisage into its mnemonic position. Hence it is plain that not
every 'phantasm' in sleep is a mere dream-image, and that the
further thinking which we perform then is due to an exercise of the
faculty of opinion.

  So much at least is plain on all these points, viz. that the faculty
by which, in waking hours, we are subject to illusion when affected by
disease, is identical with that which produces illusory effects in
sleep. So, even when persons are in excellent health, and know the
facts of the case perfectly well, the sun, nevertheless, appears to
them to be only a foot wide. Now, whether the presentative faculty
of the soul be identical with, or different from, the faculty of
sense-perception, in either case the illusion does not occur without
our actually seeing or [otherwise] perceiving something. Even to see
wrongly or to hear wrongly can happen only to one who sees or hears
something real, though not exactly what he supposes. But we have
assumed that in sleep one neither sees, nor hears, nor exercises any
sense whatever. Perhaps we may regard it as true that the dreamer sees
nothing, yet as false that his faculty of sense-perception is
unaffected, the fact being that the sense of seeing and the other
senses may possibly be then in a certain way affected, while each of
these affections, as duly as when he is awake, gives its impulse in
a certain manner to his [primary] faculty of sense, though not in
precisely the same manner as when he is awake. Sometimes, too, opinion
says [to dreamers] just as to those who are awake, that the object
seen is an illusion; at other times it is inhibited, and becomes a
mere follower of the phantasm.

  It is plain therefore that this affection, which we name 'dreaming',
is no mere exercise of opinion or intelligence, but yet is not an
affection of the faculty of perception in the simple sense. If it were
the latter it would be possible [when asleep] to hear and see in the
simple sense.

  How then, and in what manner, it takes place, is what we have to
examine. Let us assume, what is indeed clear enough, that the
affection [of dreaming] pertains to sense-perception as surely as
sleep itself does. For sleep does not pertain to one organ in
animals and dreaming to another; both pertain to the same organ.

  But since we have, in our work On the Soul, treated of presentation,
and the faculty of presentation is identical with that of
sense-perception, though the essential notion of a faculty of
presentation is different from that of a faculty of
sense-perception; and since presentation is the movement set up by a
sensory faculty when actually discharging its function, while a
dream appears to be a presentation (for a presentation which occurs in
sleep-whether simply or in some particular way-is what we call a
dream): it manifestly follows that dreaming is an activity of the
faculty of sense-perception, but belongs to this faculty qua
presentative.

                                 2

  We can best obtain a scientific view of the nature of the dream
and the manner in which it originates by regarding it in the light
of the circumstances attending sleep. The objects of
sense-perception corresponding to each sensory organ produce
sense-perception in us, and the affection due to their operation is
present in the organs of sense not only when the perceptions are
actualized, but even when they have departed.

  What happens in these cases may be compared with what happens in the
case of projectiles moving in space. For in the case of these the
movement continues even when that which set up the movement is no
longer in contact [with the things that are moved]. For that which set
them in motion moves a certain portion of air, and this, in turn,
being moved excites motion in another portion; and so, accordingly, it
is in this way that [the bodies], whether in air or in liquids,
continue moving, until they come to a standstill.

  This we must likewise assume to happen in the case of qualitative
change; for that part which [for example] has been heated by something
hot, heats [in turn] the part next to it, and this propagates the
affection continuously onwards until the process has come round to its
oint of origination. This must also happen in the organ wherein the
exercise of sense-perception takes place, since sense-perception, as
realized in actual perceiving, is a mode of qualitative change. This
explains why the affection continues in the sensory organs, both in
their deeper and in their more superficial parts, not merely while
they are actually engaged in perceiving, but even after they have
ceased to do so. That they do this, indeed, is obvious in cases
where we continue for some time engaged in a particular form of
perception, for then, when we shift the scene of our perceptive
activity, the previous affection remains; for instance, when we have
turned our gaze from sunlight into darkness. For the result of this is
that one sees nothing, owing to the excited by the light still
subsisting in our eyes. Also, when we have looked steadily for a
long while at one colour, e.g. at white or green, that to which we
next transfer our gaze appears to be of the same colour. Again if,
after having looked at the sun or some other brilliant object, we
close the eyes, then, if we watch carefully, it appears in a right
line with the direction of vision (whatever this may be), at first
in its own colour; then it changes to crimson, next to purple, until
it becomes black and disappears. And also when persons turn away
from looking at objects in motion, e.g. rivers, and especially those
which flow very rapidly, they find that the visual stimulations
still present themselves, for the things really at rest are then
seen moving: persons become very deaf after hearing loud noises, and
after smelling very strong odours their power of smelling is impaired;
and similarly in other cases. These phenomena manifestly take place in
the way above described.

  That the sensory organs are acutely sensitive to even a slight
qualitative difference [in their objects] is shown by what happens
in the case of mirrors; a subject to which, even taking it
independently, one might devote close consideration and inquiry. At
the same time it becomes plain from them that as the eye [in seeing]
is affected [by the object seen], so also it produces a certain effect
upon it. If a woman chances during her menstrual period to look into a
highly polished mirror, the surface of it will grow cloudy with a
blood-coloured haze. It is very hard to remove this stain from a new
mirror, but easier to remove from an older mirror. As we have said
before, the cause of this lies in the fact that in the act of sight
there occurs not only a passion in the sense organ acted on by the
polished surface, but the organ, as an agent, also produces an action,
as is proper to a brilliant object. For sight is the property of an
organ possessing brilliance and colour. The eyes, therefore, have
their proper action as have other parts of the body. Because it is
natural to the eye to be filled with blood-vessels, a woman's eyes,
during the period of menstrual flux and inflammation, will undergo a
change, although her husband will not note this since his seed is of
the same nature as that of his wife. The surrounding atmosphere,
through which operates the action of sight, and which surrounds the
mirror also, will undergo a change of the same sort that occurred
shortly before in the woman's eyes, and hence the surface of the
mirror is likewise affected. And as in the case of a garment, the
cleaner it is the more quickly it is soiled, so the same holds true in
the case of the mirror. For anything that is clean will show quite
clearly a stain that it chances to receive, and the cleanest object
shows up even the slightest stain. A bronze mirror, because of its
shininess, is especially sensitive to any sort of contact (the
movement of the surrounding air acts upon it like a rubbing or
pressing or wiping); on that account, therefore, what is clean will
show up clearly the slightest touch on its surface. It is hard to
cleanse smudges off new mirrors because the stain penetrates deeply
and is suffused to all parts; it penetrates deeply because the
mirror is not a dense medium, and is suffused widely because of the
smoothness of the object. On the other hand, in the case of old
mirrors, stains do not remain because they do not penetrate deeply,
but only smudge the surface.

  From this therefore it is plain that stimulatory motion is set up
even by slight differences, and that sense-perception is quick to
respond to it; and further that the organ which perceives colour is
not only affected by its object, but also reacts upon it. Further
evidence to the same point is afforded by what takes place in wines,
and in the manufacture of unguents. For both oil, when prepared, and
wine become rapidly infected by the odours of the things near them;
they not only acquire the odours of the things thrown into or mixed
with them, but also those of the things which are placed, or which
grow, near the vessels containing them.

  In order to answer our original question, let us now, therefore,
assume one proposition, which is clear from what precedes, viz. that
even when the external object of perception has departed, the
impressions it has made persist, and are themselves objects of
perception: and [let us assume], besides, that we are easily
deceived respecting the operations of sense-perception when we are
excited by emotions, and different persons according to their
different emotions; for example, the coward when excited by fear,
the amorous person by amorous desire; so that, with but little
resemblance to go upon, the former thinks he sees his foes
approaching, the latter, that he sees the object of his desire; and
the more deeply one is under the influence of the emotion, the less
similarity is required to give rise to these illusory impressions.
Thus too, both in fits of anger, and also in all states of appetite,
all men become easily deceived, and more so the more their emotions
are excited. This is the reason too why persons in the delirium of
fever sometimes think they see animals on their chamber walls, an
illusion arising from the faint resemblance to animals of the markings
thereon when put together in patterns; and this sometimes
corresponds with the emotional states of the sufferers, in such a
way that, if the latter be not very ill, they know well enough that it
is an illusion; but if the illness is more severe they actually move
according to the appearances. The cause of these occurrences is that
the faculty in virtue of which the controlling sense judges is not
identical with that in virtue of which presentations come before the
mind. A proof of this is, that the sun presents itself as only a
foot in diameter, though often something else gainsays the
presentation. Again, when the fingers are crossed, the one object
[placed between them] is felt [by the touch] as two; but yet we deny
that it is two; for sight is more authoritative than touch. Yet, if
touch stood alone, we should actually have pronounced the one object
to be two. The ground of such false judgements is that any appearances
whatever present themselves, not only when its object stimulates a
sense, but also when the sense by itself alone is stimulated, provided
only it be stimulated in the same manner as it is by the object. For
example, to persons sailing past the land seems to move, when it is
really the eye that is being moved by something else [the moving ship.]

                                 3

  From this it is manifest that the stimulatory movements based upon
sensory impressions, whether the latter are derived from external
objects or from causes within the body, present themselves not only
when persons are awake, but also then, when this affection which is
called sleep has come upon them, with even greater impressiveness. For
by day, while the senses and the intellect are working together,
they (i.e. such movements) are extruded from consciousness or
obscured, just as a smaller is beside a larger fire, or as small
beside great pains or pleasures, though, as soon as the latter have
ceased, even those which are trifling emerge into notice. But by night
[i.e. in sleep] owing to the inaction of the particular senses, and
their powerlessness to realize themselves, which arises from the
reflux of the hot from the exterior parts to the interior, they
[i.e. the above 'movements'] are borne in to the head quarters of
sense-perception, and there display themselves as the disturbance
(of waking life) subsides. We must suppose that, like the little
eddies which are being ever formed in rivers, so the sensory movements
are each a continuous process, often remaining like what they were
when first started, but often, too, broken into other forms by
collisions with obstacles. This [last mentioned point], moreover,
gives the reason why no dreams occur in sleep immediately after meals,
or to sleepers who are extremely young, e.g. to infants. The
internal movement in such cases is excessive, owing to the heat
generated from the food. Hence, just as in a liquid, if one vehemently
disturbs it, sometimes no reflected image appears, while at other
times one appears, indeed, but utterly distorted, so as to seem
quite unlike its original; while, when once the motion has ceased, the
reflected images are clear and plain; in the same manner during
sleep the phantasms, or residuary movements, which are based upon
the sensory impressions, become sometimes quite obliterated by the
above described motion when too violent; while at other times the
sights are indeed seen, but confused and weird, and the dreams
[which then appear] are unhealthy, like those of persons who are
atrabilious, or feverish, or intoxicated with wine. For all such
affections, being spirituous, cause much commotion and disturbance. In
sanguineous animals, in proportion as the blood becomes calm, and as
its purer are separated from its less pure elements, the fact that the
movement, based on impressions derived from each of the organs of
sense, is preserved in its integrity, renders the dreams healthy,
causes a [clear] image to present itself, and makes the dreamer think,
owing to the effects borne in from the organ of sight, that he
actually sees, and owing to those which come from the organ of
hearing, that he really hears; and so on with those also which proceed
from the other sensory organs. For it is owing to the fact that the
movement which reaches the primary organ of sense comes from them,
that one even when awake believes himself to see, or hear, or
otherwise perceive; just as it is from a belief that the organ of
sight is being stimulated, though in reality not so stimulated, that
we sometimes erroneously declare ourselves to see, or that, from the
fact that touch announces two movements, we think that the one
object is two. For, as a rule, the governing sense affirms the
report of each particular sense, unless another particular sense, more
authoritative, makes a contradictory report. In every case an
appearance presents itself, but what appears does not in every case
seem real, unless when the deciding faculty is inhibited, or does
not move with its proper motion. Moreover, as we said that different
men are subject to illusions, each according to the different
emotion present in him, so it is that the sleeper, owing to sleep, and
to the movements then going on in his sensory organs, as well as to
the other facts of the sensory process, [is liable to illusion], so
that the dream presentation, though but little like it, appears as
some actual given thing. For when one is asleep, in proportion as most
of the blood sinks inwards to its fountain [the heart], the internal
[sensory] movements, some potential, others actual accompany it
inwards. They are so related [in general] that, if anything move the
blood, some one sensory movement will emerge from it, while if this
perishes another will take its place; while to one another also they
are related in the same way as the artificial frogs in water which
severally rise [in fixed succesion] to the surface in the order in
which the salt [which keeps them down] becomes dissolved. The
residuary movements are like these: they are within the soul
potentially, but actualize themselves only when the impediment to
their doing so has been relaxed; and according as they are thus set
free, they begin to move in the blood which remains in the sensory
organs, and which is now but scanty, while they possess verisimilitude
after the manner of cloud-shapes, which in their rapid metamorphoses
one compares now to human beings and a moment afterwards to
centaurs. Each of them is however, as has been said, the remnant of
a sensory impression taken when sense was actualizing itself; and when
this, the true impression, has departed, its remnant is still
immanent, and it is correct to say of it, that though not actually
Koriskos, it is like Koriskos. For when the person was actually
perceiving, his controlling and judging sensory faculty did not call
it Koriskos, but, prompted by this [impression], called the genuine
person yonder Koriskos. Accordingly, this sensory impulse, which, when
actually perceiving, it [the controlling faculty] describes (unless
completely inhibited by the blood), it now [in dreams] when
quasi-perceiving, receives from the movements persisting in the
sense-organs, and mistakes it-an impulse that is merely like the
true [objective] impression-for the true impression itself, while
the effect of sleep is so great that it causes this mistake to pass
unnoticed. Accordingly, just as if a finger be inserted beneath the
eyeball without being observed, one object will not only present two
visual images, but will create an opinion of its being two objects;
while if it [the finger] be observed, the presentation will be the
same, but the same opinion will not be formed of it; exactly so it
is in states of sleep: if the sleeper perceives that he is asleep, and
is conscious of the sleeping state during which the perception comes
before his mind, it presents itself still, but something within him
speaks to this effect: 'the image of Koriskos presents itself, but the
real Koriskos is not present'; for often, when one is asleep, there is
something in consciousness which declares that what then presents
itself is but a dream. If, however, he is not aware of being asleep,
there is nothing which will contradict the testimony of the bare
presentation.

  That what we here urge is true, i.e. that there are such
presentative movements in the sensory organs, any one may convince
himself, if he attends to and tries to remember the affections we
experience when sinking into slumber or when being awakened. He will
sometimes, in the moment of awakening, surprise the images which
present themselves to him in sleep, and find that they are really
but movements lurking in the organs of sense. And indeed some very
young persons, if it is dark, though looking with wide open eyes,
see multitudes of phantom figures moving before them, so that they
often cover up their heads in terror.

  From all this, then, the conclusion to be drawn is, that the dream
is a sort of presentation, and, more particularly, one which occurs in
sleep; since the phantoms just mentioned are not dreams, nor is any
other a dream which presents itself when the sense-perceptions are
in a state of freedom. Nor is every presentation which occurs in sleep
necessarily a dream. For in the first place, some persons [when
asleep] actually, in a certain way, perceive sounds, light, savour,
and contact; feebly, however, and, as it were, remotely. For there
have been cases in which persons while asleep, but with the eyes
partly open, saw faintly in their sleep (as they supposed) the light
of a lamp, and afterwards, on being awakened, straightway recognized
it as the actual light of a real lamp; while, in other cases,
persons who faintly heard the crowing of cocks or the barking of
dogs identified these clearly with the real sounds as soon as they
awoke. Some persons, too, return answers to questions put to them in
sleep. For it is quite possible that, of waking or sleeping, while the
one is present in the ordinary sense, the other also should be present
in a certain way. But none of these occurrences should be called a
dream. Nor should the true thoughts, as distinct from the mere
presentations, which occur in sleep [be called dreams]. The dream
proper is a presentation based on the movement of sense impressions,
when such presentation occurs during sleep, taking sleep in the strict
sense of the term.

  There are cases of persons who in their whole lives have never had a
dream, while others dream when considerably advanced in years,
having never dreamed before. The cause of their not having dreams
appears somewhat like that which operates in the case of infants, and
[that which operates] immediately after meals. It is intelligible
enough that no dream-presentation should occur to persons whose
natural constitution is such that in them copious evaporation is borne
upwards, which, when borne back downwards, causes a large quantity of
motion. But it is not surprising that, as age advances, a dream should
at length appear to them. Indeed, it is inevitable that, as a change
is wrought in them in proportion to age or emotional experience, this
reversal [from non-dreaming to dreaming] should occur also.

                             THE END
.


350 BC

ON PROPHESYING BY DREAMS

by Aristotle

translated by J. I. Beare

1

As to the divination which takes place in sleep, and is said to be
based on dreams, we cannot lightly either dismiss it with contempt
or give it implicit confidence. The fact that all persons, or many,
suppose dreams to possess a special significance, tends to inspire
us with belief in it [such divination], as founded on the testimony of
experience; and indeed that divination in dreams should, as regards
some subjects, be genuine, is not incredible, for it has a show of
reason; from which one might form a like opinion also respecting all
other dreams. Yet the fact of our seeing no probable cause to
account for such divination tends to inspire us with distrust. For, in
addition to its further unreasonableness, it is absurd to combine
the idea that the sender of such dreams should be God with the fact
that those to whom he sends them are not the best and wisest, but
merely commonplace persons. If, however, we abstract from the
causality of God, none of the other causes assigned appears
probable. For that certain persons should have foresight in dreams
concerning things destined to take place at the Pillars of Hercules,
or on the banks of the Borysthenes, seems to be something to
discover the explanation of which surpasses the wit of man. Well then,
the dreams in question must be regarded either as causes, or as
tokens, of the events, or else as coincidences; either as all, or
some, of these, or as one only. I use the word 'cause' in the sense in
which the moon is [the cause] of an eclipse of the sun, or in which
fatigue is [a cause] of fever; 'token' [in the sense in which] the
entrance of a star [into the shadow] is a token of the eclipse, or [in
which] roughness of the tongue [is a token] of fever; while by
'coincidence' I mean, for example, the occurrence of an eclipse of the
sun while some one is taking a walk; for the walking is neither a
token nor a cause of the eclipse, nor the eclipse [a cause or token]
of the walking. For this reason no coincidence takes place according
to a universal or general rule. Are we then to say that some dreams
are causes, others tokens, e.g. of events taking place in the bodily
organism? At all events, even scientific physicians tell us that one
should pay diligent attention to dreams, and to hold this view is
reasonable also for those who are not practitioners, but speculative
philosophers. For the movements which occur in the daytime [within the
body] are, unless very great and violent, lost sight of in contrast
with the waking movements, which are more impressive. In sleep the
opposite takes place, for then even trifling movements seem
considerable. This is plain in what often happens during sleep; for
example, dreamers fancy that they are affected by thunder and
lightning, when in fact there are only faint ringings in their ears;
or that they are enjoying honey or other sweet savours, when only a
tiny drop of phlegm is flowing down [the oesophagus]; or that they are
walking through fire, and feeling intense heat, when there is only a
slight warmth affecting certain parts of the body. When they are
awakened, these things appear to them in this their true character.
But since the beginnings of all events are small, so, it is clear, are
those also of the diseases or other affections about to occur in our
bodies. In conclusion, it is manifest that these beginnings must be
more evident in sleeping than in waking moments.

Nay, indeed, it is not improbable that some of the presentations
which come before the mind in sleep may even be causes of the
actions cognate to each of them. For as when we are about to act [in
waking hours], or are engaged in any course of action, or have already
performed certain actions, we often find ourselves concerned with
these actions, or performing them, in a vivid dream; the cause whereof
is that the dream-movement has had a way paved for it from the
original movements set up in the daytime; exactly so, but
conversely, it must happen that the movements set up first in sleep
should also prove to be starting-points of actions to be performed
in the daytime, since the recurrence by day of the thought of these
actions also has had its way paved for it in the images before the
mind at night. Thus then it is quite conceivable that some dreams
may be tokens and causes [of future events].

Most [so-called prophetic] dreams are, however, to be classed as
mere coincidences, especially all such as are extravagant, and those
in the fulfilment of which the dreamers have no initiative, such as in
the case of a sea-fight, or of things taking place far away. As
regards these it is natural that the fact should stand as it does
whenever a person, on mentioning something, finds the very thing
mentioned come to pass. Why, indeed, should this not happen also in
sleep? The probability is, rather, that many such things should
happen. As, then, one's mentioning a particular person is neither
token nor cause of this person's presenting himself, so, in the
parallel instance, the dream is, to him who has seen it, neither token
nor cause of its [so-called] fulfilment, but a mere coincidence. Hence
the fact that many dreams have no 'fulfilment', for coincidence do not
occur according to any universal or general law.

2

On the whole, forasmuch as certain of the lower animals also
dream, it may be concluded that dreams are not sent by God, nor are
they designed for this purpose [to reveal the future]. They have a
divine aspect, however, for Nature [their cause] is divinely
planned, though not itself divine. A special proof [of their not being
sent by God] is this: the power of foreseeing the future and of having
vivid dreams is found in persons of inferior type, which implies
that God does not send their dreams; but merely that all those whose
physical temperament is, as it were, garrulous and excitable, see
sights of all descriptions; for, inasmuch as they experience many
movements of every kind, they just chance to have visions resembling
objective facts, their luck in these matters being merely like that of
persons who play at even and odd. For the principle which is expressed
in the gambler's maxim: 'If you make many throws your luck must
change,' holds in their case also.

That many dreams have no fulfilment is not strange, for it is so too
with many bodily toms and weather-signs, e.g. those of train or
wind. For if another movement occurs more influential than that from
which, while [the event to which it pointed was] still future, the
given token was derived, the event [to which such token pointed]
does not take place. So, of the things which ought to be
accomplished by human agency, many, though well-planned are by the
operation of other principles more powerful [than man's agency]
brought to nought. For, speaking generally, that which was about to
happen is not in every case what now is happening, nor is that which
shall hereafter he identical with that which is now going to be.
Still, however, we must hold that the beginnings from which, as we
said, no consummation follows, are real beginnings, and these
constitute natural tokens of certain events, even though the events do
not come to pass.

As for [prophetic] dreams which involve not such beginnings [sc.
of future events] as we have here described, but such as are
extravagant in times, or places, or magnitudes; or those involving
beginnings which are not extravagant in any of these respects, while
yet the persons who see the dream hold not in their own hands the
beginnings [of the event to which it points]: unless the foresight
which such dreams give is the result of pure coincidence, the
following would be a better explanation of it than that proposed by
Democritus, who alleges 'images' and 'emanations' as its cause. As,
when something has caused motion in water or air, this [the portion of
water or air], and, though the cause has ceased to operate, such
motion propagates itself to a certain point, though there the prime
movement is not present; just so it may well be that a movement and
a consequent sense-perception should reach sleeping souls from the
objects from which Democritus represents 'images' and 'emanations'
coming; that such movements, in whatever way they arrive, should be
more perceptible at night [than by day], because when proceeding
thus in the daytime they are more liable to dissolution (since at
night the air is less disturbed, there being then less wind); and that
they shall be perceived within the body owing to sleep, since
persons are more sensitive even to slight sensory movements when
asleep than when awake. It is these movements then that cause
'presentations', as a result of which sleepers foresee the future even
relatively to such events as those referred to above. These
considerations also explain why this experience befalls commonplace
persons and not the most intelligent. For it would have regularly
occurred both in the daytime and to the wise had it been God who
sent it; but, as we have explained the matter, it is quite natural
that commonplace persons should be those who have foresight [in
dreams]. For the mind of such persons is not given to thinking, but,
as it were, derelict, or totally vacant, and, when once set moving, is
borne passively on in the direction taken by that which moves it. With
regard to the fact that some persons who are liable to derangement
have this foresight, its explanation is that their normal mental
movements do not impede [the alien movements], but are beaten off by
the latter. Therefore it is that they have an especially keen
perception of the alien movements.

That certain persons in particular should have vivid dreams, e.g.
that familiar friends should thus have foresight in a special degree
respecting one another, is due to the fact that such friends are
most solicitous on one another's behalf. For as acquaintances in
particular recognize and perceive one another a long way off, so
also they do as regards the sensory movements respecting one
another; for sensory movements which refer to persons familiarly known
are themselves more familiar. Atrabilious persons, owing to their
impetuosity, are, when they, as it were, shoot from a distance, expert
at hitting; while, owing to their mutability, the series of
movements deploys quickly before their minds. For even as the insane
recite, or con over in thought, the poems of Philaegides, e.g. the
Aphrodite, whose parts succeed in order of similitude, just so do they
[the 'atrabilious'] go on and on stringing sensory movements together.
Moreover, owing to their aforesaid impetuosity, one movement within
them is not liable to be knocked out of its course by some other
movement.

The most skilful interpreter of dreams is he who has the faculty
of observing resemblances. Any one may interpret dreams which are
vivid and plain. But, speaking of 'resemblances', I mean that dream
presentations are analogous to the forms reflected in water, as indeed
we have already stated. In the latter case, if the motion in the water
be great, the reflexion has no resemblance to its original, nor do the
forms resemble the real objects. Skilful, indeed, would he be in
interpreting such reflexions who could rapidly discern, and at a
glance comprehend, the scattered and distorted fragments of such
forms, so as to perceive that one of them represents a man, or a
horse, Or anything whatever. Accordingly, in the other case also, in a
similar way, some such thing as this [blurred image] is all that a
dream amounts to; for the internal movement effaces the clearness of
the dream.

The questions, therefore, which we proposed as to the nature of
sleep and the dream, and the cause to which each of them is due, and
also as to divination as a result of dreams, in every form of it, have
now been discussed.

-THE END-
.
350 BC

ON SENSE AND THE SENSIBLE

by Aristotle

translated by J. I. Beare

1

HAVING now definitely considered the soul, by itself, and its
several faculties, we must next make a survey of animals and all
living things, in order to ascertain what functions are peculiar,
and what functions are common, to them. What has been already
determined respecting the soul  [sc. by itself]  must be assumed
throughout. The remaining parts  [sc. the attributes of soul and
body conjointly]  of our subject must be now dealt with, and we may
begin with those that come first.

The most important attributes of animals, whether common to all or
peculiar to some, are, manifestly, attributes of soul and body in
conjunction, e.g. sensation, memory, passion, appetite and desire in
general, and, in addition pleasure and pain. For these may, in fact,
be said to belong to all animals. But there are, besides these,
certain other attributes, of which some are common to all living
things, while others are peculiar to certain species of animals. The
most important of these may be summed up in four pairs, viz. waking
and sleeping, youth and old age, inhalation and exhalation, life and
death. We must endeavour to arrive at a scientific conception of
these, determining their respective natures, and the causes of their
occurrence.

But it behoves the Physical Philosopher to obtain also a clear
view of the first principles of health and disease, inasmuch as
neither health nor disease can exist in lifeless things. Indeed we may
say of most physical inquirers, and of those physicians who study
their art philosophically, that while the former complete their
works with a disquisition on medicine, the latter usually base their
medical theories on principles derived from Physics.

That all the attributes above enumerated belong to soul and body
in conjunction, is obvious; for they all either imply sensation as a
concomitant, or have it as their medium. Some are either affections or
states of sensation, others, means of defending and safe-guarding
it, while others, again, involve its destruction or negation. Now it
is clear, alike by reasoning and observation, that sensation is
generated in the soul through the medium of the body.

We have already, in our treatise On the Soul, explained the nature
of sensation and the act of perceiving by sense, and the reason why
this affection belongs to animals. Sensation must, indeed, be
attributed to all animals as such, for by its presence or absence we
distinguish essentially between what is and what is not an animal.

But coming now to the special senses severally, we may say that
touch and taste necessarily appertain to all animals, touch, for the
reason given in On the Soul, and taste, because of nutrition. It is by
taste that one distinguishes in food the pleasant from the unpleasant,
so as to flee from the latter and pursue the former: and savour in
general is an affection of nutrient matter.

The senses which operate through external media, viz. smelling,
hearing, seeing, are found in all animals which possess the faculty of
locomotion. To all that possess them they are a means of preservation;
their final cause being that such creatures may, guided by
antecedent perception, both pursue their food, and shun things that
are bad or destructive. But in animals which have also intelligence
they serve for the attainment of a higher perfection. They bring in
tidings of many distinctive qualities of things, from which the
knowledge of truth, speculative and practical, is generated in the
soul.

Of the two last mentioned, seeing, regarded as a supply for the
primary wants of life, and in its direct effects, is the superior
sense; but for developing intelligence, and in its indirect
consequences, hearing takes the precedence. The faculty of seeing,
thanks to the fact that all bodies are coloured, brings tidings of
multitudes of distinctive qualities of all sorts; whence it is through
this sense especially that we perceive the common sensibles, viz.
figure, magnitude, motion, number: while hearing announces only the
distinctive qualities of sound, and, to some few animals, those also
of voice. indirectly, however, it is hearing that contributes most
to the growth of intelligence. For rational discourse is a cause of
instruction in virtue of its being audible, which it is, not directly,
but indirectly; since it is composed of words, and each word is a
thought-symbol. Accordingly, of persons destitute from birth of either
sense, the blind are more intelligent than the deaf and dumb.

2

Of the distinctive potency of each of the faculties of sense
enough has been said already.

But as to the nature of the sensory organs, or parts of the body
in which each of the senses is naturally implanted, inquirers now
usually take as their guide the fundamental elements of bodies. Not,
however, finding it easy to coordinate five senses with four elements,
they are at a loss respecting the fifth sense. But they hold the organ
of sight to consist of fire, being prompted to this view by a
certain sensory affection of whose true cause they are ignorant.
This is that, when the eye is pressed or moved, fire appears to
flash from it. This naturally takes place in darkness, or when the
eyelids are closed, for then, too, darkness is produced.

This theory, however, solves one question only to raise another;
for, unless on the hypothesis that a person who is in his full
senses can see an object of vision without being aware of it, the
eye must on this theory see itself. But then why does the above
affection not occur also when the eye is at rest? The true explanation
of this affection, which will contain the answer to our question,
and account for the current notion that the eye consists of fire, must
be determined in the following way: Things which are smooth have the
natural property of shining in darkness, without, however, producing
light. Now, the part of the eye called 'the black', i.e. its central
part, is manifestly smooth. The phenomenon of the flash occurs only
when the eye is moved, because only then could it possibly occur
that the same one object should become as it were two. The rapidity of
the movement has the effect of making that which sees and that which
is seen seem different from one another. Hence the phenomenon does not
occur unless the motion is rapid and takes place in darkness. For it
is in the dark that that which is smooth, e.g. the heads of certain
fishes, and the sepia of the cuttle-fish, naturally shines, and,
when the movement of the eye is slow, it is impossible that that which
sees and that which is seen should appear to be simultaneously two and
one. But, in fact, the eye sees itself in the above phenomenon
merely as it does so in ordinary optical reflexion.

If the visual organ proper really were fire, which is the doctrine
of Empedocles, a doctrine taught also in the Timaeus, and if vision
were the result of light issuing from the eye as from a lantern, why
should the eye not have had the power of seeing even in the dark? It
is totally idle to say, as the Timaeus does, that the visual ray
coming forth in the darkness is quenched. What is the meaning of
this 'quenching' of light? That which, like a fire of coals or an
ordinary flame, is hot and dry is, indeed, quenched by the moist or
cold; but heat and dryness are evidently not attributes of light. Or
if they are attributes of it, but belong to it in a degree so slight
as to be imperceptible to us, we should have expected that in the
daytime the light of the sun should be quenched when rain falls, and
that darkness should prevail in frosty weather. Flame, for example,
and ignited bodies are subject to such extinction, but experience
shows that nothing of this sort happens to the sunlight.

Empedocles at times seems to hold that vision is to be explained
as above stated by light issuing forth from the eye, e.g. in the
following passage:-

As when one who purposes going abroad prepares a lantern,

A gleam of fire blazing through the stormy night,

Adjusting thereto, to screen it from all sorts of winds,

transparent sides,

Which scatter the breath of the winds as they blow,

While, out through them leaping, the fire,

i.e. all the more subtile part of this,

Shines along his threshold old incessant beams:

So [Divine love] embedded the round "lens", [viz.]

the primaeval fire fenced within the membranes,

In [its own] delicate tissues;

And these fended off the deep surrounding flood,

While leaping forth the fire, i.e. all its more subtile part-.

Sometimes he accounts for vision thus, but at other times he
explains it by emanations from the visible objects.

Democritus, on the other hand, is right in his opinion that the
eye is of water; not, however, when he goes on to explain seeing as
mere mirroring. The mirroring that takes place in an eye is due to the
fact that the eye is smooth, and it really has its seat not in the eye
which is seen, but in that which sees. For the case is merely one of
reflexion. But it would seem that even in his time there was no
scientific knowledge of the general subject of the formation of images
and the phenomena of reflexion. It is strange too, that it never
occurred to him to ask why, if his theory be true, the eye alone sees,
while none of the other things in which images are reflected do so.

True, then, the visual organ proper is composed of water, yet vision
appertains to it not because it is so composed, but because it is
translucent- a property common alike to water and to air. But water
is more easily confined and more easily condensed than air;
wherefore it is that the pupil, i.e. the eye proper, consists of
water. That it does so is proved by facts of actual experience. The
substance which flows from eyes when decomposing is seen to be
water, and this in undeveloped embryos is remarkably cold and
glistening. In sanguineous animals the white of the eye is fat and
oily, in order that the moisture of the eye may be proof against
freezing. Wherefore the eye is of all parts of the body the least
sensitive to cold: no one ever feels cold in the part sheltered by the
eyelids. The eyes of bloodless animals are covered with a hard scale
which gives them similar protection.

It is, to state the matter generally, an irrational notion that
the eye should see in virtue of something issuing from it; that the
visual ray should extend itself all the way to the stars, or else go
out merely to a certain point, and there coalesce, as some say, with
rays which proceed from the object. It would be better to suppose this
coalescence to take place in the fundament of the eye itself. But even
this would be mere trifling. For what is meant by the 'coalescence' of
light with light? Or how is it possible? Coalescence does not occur
between any two things taken at random. And how could the light within
the eye coalesce with that outside it? For the environing membrane
comes between them.

That without light vision is impossible has been stated elsewhere;
but, whether the medium between the eye and its objects is air or
light, vision is caused by a process through this medium.

Accordingly, that the inner part of the eye consists of water is
easily intelligible, water being translucent.

Now, as vision outwardly is impossible without [extra-organic]
light, so also it is impossible inwardly [without light within the
organ]. There must, therefore, be some translucent medium within the
eye, and, as this is not air, it must be water. The soul or its
perceptive part is not situated at the external surface of the eye,
but obviously somewhere within: whence the necessity of the interior
of the eye being translucent, i.e. capable of admitting light. And
that it is so is plain from actual occurrences. It is matter of
experience that soldiers wounded in battle by a sword slash on the
temple, so inflicted as to sever the passages of [i.e. inward from]
the eye, feel a sudden onset of darkness, as if a lamp had gone out;
because what is called the pupil, i.e. the translucent, which is a
sort of inner lamp, is then cut off [from its connexion with the
soul].

Hence, if the facts be at all as here stated, it is clear that- if
one should explain the nature of the sensory organs in this way,
i.e. by correlating each of them with one of the four elements,- we
must conceive that the part of the eye immediately concerned in vision
consists of water, that the part immediately concerned in the
perception of sound consists of air, and that the sense of smell
consists of fire. (I say the sense of smell, not the organ.) For the
organ of smell is only potentially that which the sense of smell, as
realized, is actually; since the object of sense is what causes the
actualization of each sense, so that it (the sense) must (at the
instant of actualization) be (actually) that which before (the
moment of actualization) it was potentially. Now, odour is a
smoke-like evaporation, and smoke-like evaporation arises from fire.
This also helps us to understand why the olfactory organ has its
proper seat in the environment of the brain, for cold matter is
potentially hot. In the same way must the genesis of the eye be
explained. Its structure is an offshoot from the brain, because the
latter is the moistest and coldest of all the bodily parts.

The organ of touch proper consists of earth, and the faculty of
taste is a particular form of touch. This explains why the sensory
organ of both touch and taste is closely related to the heart. For the
heart as being the hottest of all the bodily parts, is the
counterpoise of the brain.

This then is the way in which the characteristics of the bodily
organs of sense must be determined.

3

Of the sensibles corresponding to each sensory organ, viz. colour,
sound, odour, savour, touch, we have treated in On the Soul in general
terms, having there determined what their function is, and what is
implied in their becoming actualized in relation to their respective
organs. We must next consider what account we are to give of any one
of them; what, for example, we should say colour is, or sound, or
odour, or savour; and so also respecting [the object of] touch. We
begin with colour.

Now, each of them may be spoken of from two points of view, i.e.
either as actual or as potential. We have in On the Soul explained
in what sense the colour, or sound, regarded as actualized [for
sensation] is the same as, and in what sense it is different from, the
correlative sensation, the actual seeing or hearing. The point of
our present discussion is, therefore, to determine what each
sensible object must be in itself, in order to be perceived as it is
in actual consciousness.

We have already in On the Soul stated of Light that it is the colour
of the Translucent, [being so related to it] incidentally; for
whenever a fiery element is in a translucent medium presence there
is Light; while the privation of it is Darkness. But the
'Translucent', as we call it, is not something peculiar to air, or
water, or any other of the bodies usually called translucent, but is a
common 'nature' and power, capable of no separate existence of its
own, but residing in these, and subsisting likewise in all other
bodies in a greater or less degree. As the bodies in which it subsists
must have some extreme bounding surface, so too must this. Here, then,
we may say that Light is a 'nature' inhering in the Translucent when
the latter is without determinate boundary. But it is manifest that,
when the Translucent is in determinate bodies, its bounding extreme
must be something real; and that colour is just this 'something' we
are plainly taught by facts-colour being actually either at the
external limit, or being itself that limit, in bodies. Hence it was
that the Pythagoreans named the superficies of a body its 'hue', for
'hue', indeed, lies at the limit of the body; but the limit of the
body; is not a real thing; rather we must suppose that the same
natural substance which, externally, is the vehicle of colour exists
[as such a possible vehicle] also in the interior of the body.

Air and water, too [i.e. as well as determinately bounded bodies]
are seen to possess colour; for their brightness is of the nature of
colour. But the colour which air or sea presents, since the body in
which it resides is not determinately bounded, is not the same when
one approaches and views it close by as it is when one regards it from
a distance; whereas in determinate bodies the colour presented is
definitely fixed, unless, indeed, when the atmospheric environment
causes it to change. Hence it is clear that that in them which is
susceptible of colour is in both cases the same. It is therefore the
Translucent, according to the degree to which it subsists in bodies
(and it does so in all more or less), that causes them to partake of
colour. But since the colour is at the extremity of the body, it
must be at the extremity of the Translucent in the body. Whence it
follows that we may define colour as the limit of the Translucent in
determinately bounded body. For whether we consider the special
class of bodies called translucent, as water and such others, or
determinate bodies, which appear to possess a fixed colour of their
own, it is at the exterior bounding surface that all alike exhibit
their colour.

Now, that which when present in air produces light may be present
also in the Translucent which pervades determinate bodies; or again,
it may not be present, but there may be a privation of it.
Accordingly, as in the case of air the one condition is light, the
other darkness, in the same way the colours White and Black are
generated in determinate bodies.

We must now treat of the other colours, reviewing the several
hypotheses invented to explain their genesis.

(1) It is conceivable that the White and the Black should be
juxtaposed in quantities so minute that [a particle of] either
separately would be invisible, though the joint product [of two
particles, a black and a white] would be visible; and that they should
thus have the other colours for resultants. Their product could, at
all events, appear neither white nor black; and, as it must have
some colour, and can have neither of these, this colour must be of a
mixed
character- in fact, a species of colour different from either. Such,
then, is a possible way of conceiving the existence of a plurality
of colours besides the White and Black; and we may suppose that [of
this 'plurality'] many are the result of a [numerical] ratio; for
the blacks and whites may be juxtaposed in the ratio of 3 to 2 or of 3
to 4, or in ratios expressible by other numbers; while some may be
juxtaposed according to no numerically expressible ratio, but
according to some relation of excess or defect in which the blacks and
whites involved would be incommensurable quantities; and, accordingly,
we may regard all these colours [viz. all those based on numerical
ratios] as analogous to the sounds that enter into music, and
suppose that those involving simple numerical ratios, like the
concords in music, may be those generally regarded as most
agreeable; as, for example, purple, crimson, and some few such
colours, their fewness being due to the same causes which render the
concords few. The other compound colours may be those which are not
based on numbers. Or it may be that, while all colours whatever
[except black and white] are based on numbers, some are regular in
this respect, others irregular; and that the latter [though now
supposed to be all based on numbers], whenever they are not pure,
owe this character to a corresponding impurity in [the arrangement of]
their numerical ratios. This then is one conceivable hypothesis to
explain the genesis of intermediate colours.

(2) Another is that the Black and White appear the one through the
medium of the other, giving an effect like that sometimes produced
by painters overlaying a less vivid upon a more vivid colour, as
when they desire to represent an object appearing under water or
enveloped in a haze, and like that produced by the sun, which in
itself appears white, but takes a crimson hue when beheld through a
fog or a cloud of smoke. On this hypothesis, too, a variety of colours
may be conceived to arise in the same way as that already described;
for between those at the surface and those underneath a definite ratio
might sometimes exist; in other cases they might stand in no
determinate ratio. To [introduce a theory of colour which would set
all these hypotheses aside, and] say with the ancients that colours
are emanations, and that the visibility of objects is due to such a
cause, is absurd. For they must, in any case, explain sense-perception
through Touch; so that it were better to say at once that visual
perception is due to a process set up by the perceived object in the
medium between this object and the sensory organ; due, that is, to
contact [with the medium affected,] not to emanations.

If we accept the hypothesis of juxtaposition, we must assume not
only invisible magnitude, but also imperceptible time, in order that
the succession in the arrival of the stimulatory movements may be
unperceived, and that the compound colour seen may appear to be one,
owing to its successive parts seeming to present themselves at once.
On the hypothesis of superposition, however, no such assumption is
needful: the stimulatory process produced in the medium by the upper
colour, when this is itself unaffected, will be different in kind from
that produced by it when affected by the underlying colour. Hence it
presents itself as a different colour, i.e. as one which is neither
white nor black. So that, if it is impossible to suppose any magnitude
to be invisible, and we must assume that there is some distance from
which every magnitude is visible, this superposition theory, too [i.e.
as well as No. 3 infra], might pass as a real theory of
colour-mixture. Indeed, in the previous case also there is no reason
why, to persons at a distance from the juxtaposed blacks and whites,
some one colour should not appear to present itself as a blend of
both. [But it would not be so on a nearer view], for it will be shown,
in a discussion to be undertaken later on, that there is no
magnitude absolutely invisible.

(3) There is a mixture of bodies, however, not merely such as some
suppose, i.e. by juxtaposition of their minimal parts, which, owing to
[the weakness of our] sense, are imperceptible by us, but a mixture by
which they [i.e. the 'matter' of which they consist] are wholly
blent together by interpenetration, as we have described it in the
treatise on Mixture, where we dealt with this subject generally in its
most comprehensive aspect. For, on the supposition we are criticizing,
the only totals capable of being mixed are those which are divisible
into minimal parts, [e.g. genera into individuals] as men, horses,
or the [various kinds of] seeds. For of mankind as a whole the
individual man is such a least part; of horses [as an aggregate] the
individual horse. Hence by the juxtaposition of these we obtain a
mixed total, consisting [like a troop of cavalry] of both together;
but we do not say that by such a process any individual man has been
mixed with any individual horse. Not in this way, but by complete
interpenetration [of their matter], must we conceive those things to
be mixed which are not divisible into minima; and it is in the case of
these that natural mixture exhibits itself in its most perfect form.
We have explained already in our discourse 'On Mixture' how such
mixture is possible. This being the true nature of mixture, it is
plain that when bodies are mixed their colours also are necessarily
mixed at the same time; and [it is no less plain] that this is the
real cause determining the existence of a plurality of colours- not
superposition or juxtaposition. For when bodies are thus mixed,
their resultant colour presents itself as one and the same at all
distances alike; not varying as it is seen nearer or farther away.

Colours will thus, too [as well as on the former hypotheses], be
many in number on account of the fact that the ingredients may be
combined with one another in a multitude of ratios; some will be based
on determinate numerical ratios, while others again will have as their
basis a relation of quantitative excess or defect not expressible in
integers. And all else that was said in reference to the colours,
considered as juxtaposed or superposed, may be said of them likewise
when regarded as mixed in the way just described.

Why colours, as well as savours and sounds, consist of species
determinate [in themselves] and not infinite [in number] is a question
which we shall discuss hereafter.

4

We have now explained what colour is, and the reason why there are
many colours; while before, in our work On the Soul, we explained
the nature of sound and voice. We have next to speak of Odour and
Savour, both of which are almost the same physical affection, although
they each have their being in different things. Savours, as a class,
display their nature more clearly to us than Odours, the cause of
which is that the olfactory sense of man is inferior in acuteness to
that of the lower animals, and is, when compared with our other
senses, the least perfect of Man's sense of Touch, on the contrary,
excels that of all other animals in fineness, and Taste is a
modification of Touch.

Now the natural substance water per se tends to be tasteless. But
[since without water tasting is impossible] either (a) we must suppose
that water contains in itself [uniformly diffused through it] the
various kinds of savour, already formed, though in amounts so small as
to be imperceptible, which is the doctrine of Empedocles; or (b) the
water must be a sort of matter, qualified, as it were, to produce
germs of savours of all kinds, so that all kinds of savour are
generated from the water, though different kinds from its different
parts, or else (c) the water is in itself quite undifferentiated in
respect of savour [whether developed or undeveloped], but some
agent, such for example as one might conceive Heat or the Sun to be,
is the efficient cause of savour.

(a) Of these three hypotheses, the falsity of that held by
Empedocles is only too evident. For we see that when pericarpal fruits
are plucked [from the tree] and exposed in the sun, or subjected to
the action of fire, their sapid juices are changed by the heat,
which shows that their qualities are not due to their drawing anything
from the water in the ground, but to a change which they undergo
within the pericarp itself; and we see, moreover, that these juices,
when extracted and allowed to lie, instead of sweet become by lapse of
time harsh or bitter, or acquire savours of any and every sort; and
that, again, by the process of boiling or fermentation they are made
to assume almost all kinds of new savours.

(b) It is likewise impossible that water should be a material
qualified to generate all kinds of Savour germs [so that different
savours should arise out of different parts of the water]; for we
see different kinds of taste generated from the same water, having
it as their nutriment.

(C) It remains, therefore, to suppose that the water is changed by
passively receiving some affection from an external agent. Now, it
is manifest that water does not contract the quality of sapidity
from the agency of Heat alone. For water is of all liquids the
thinnest, thinner even than oil itself, though oil, owing to its
viscosity, is more ductile than water, the latter being uncohesive
in its particles; whence water is more difficult than oil to hold in
the hand without spilling. But since perfectly pure water does not,
when subjected to the action of Heat, show any tendency to acquire
consistency, we must infer that some other agency than heat is the
cause of sapidity. For all savours [i.e. sapid liquors] exhibit a
comparative consistency. Heat is, however, a coagent in the matter.

Now the sapid juices found in pericarpal fruits evidently exist also
in the earth. Hence many of the old natural philosophers assert that
water has qualities like those of the earth through which it flows,
a fact especially manifest in the case of saline springs, for salt
is a form of earth. Hence also when liquids are filtered through
ashes, a bitter substance, the taste they yield is bitter. There are
many wells, too, of which some are bitter, others acid, while others
exhibit other tastes of all kinds.

As was to be anticipated, therefore, it is in the vegetable
kingdom that tastes occur in richest variety. For, like all things
else, the Moist, by nature's law, is affected only by its contrary;
and this contrary is the Dry. Thus we see why the Moist is affected by
Fire, which as a natural substance, is dry. Heat is, however, the
essential property of Fire, as Dryness is of Earth, according to
what has been said in our treatise on the elements. Fire and Earth,
therefore, taken absolutely as such, have no natural power to
affect, or be affected by, one another; nor have any other pair of
substances. Any two things can affect, or be affected by, one
another only so far as contrariety to the other resides in either of
them.

As, therefore, persons washing Colours or Savours in a liquid
cause the water in which they wash to acquire such a quality [as
that of the colour or savour], so nature, too, by washing the Dry
and Earthy in the Moist, and by filtering the latter, that is,
moving it on by the agency of heat through the dry and earthy, imparts
to it a certain quality. This affection, wrought by the aforesaid
Dry in the Moist, capable of transforming the sense of Taste from
potentiality to actuality, is Savour. Savour brings into actual
exercise the perceptive faculty which pre-existed only in potency. The
activity of sense-perception in general is analogous, not to the
process of acquiring knowledge, but to that of exercising knowledge
already acquired.

That Savours, either as a quality or as the privation of a
quality, belong not to every form of the Dry but to the Nutrient, we
shall see by considering that neither the Dry without the Moist, nor
the Moist without the Dry, is nutrient. For no single element, but
only composite substance, constitutes nutriment for animals. Now,
among the perceptible elements of the food which animals assimilate,
the tangible are the efficient causes of growth and decay; it is qua
hot or cold that the food assimilated causes these; for the heat or
cold is the direct cause of growth or decay. It is qua gustable,
however, that the assimilated food supplies nutrition. For all
organisms are nourished by the Sweet [i.e. the 'gustable' proper],
either by itself or in combination with other savours. Of this we must
speak with more precise detail in our work on Generation: for the
present we need touch upon it only so far as our subject here
requires. Heat causes growth, and fits the food-stuff for
alimentation; it attracts [into the organic system] that which is
light [viz. the sweet], while the salt and bitter it rejects because
of their heaviness. In fact, whatever effects external heat produces
in external bodies, the same are produced by their internal heat in
animal and vegetable organisms. Hence it is [i.e. by the agency of
heat as described] that nourishment is effected by the sweet. The
other savours are introduced into and blended in food [naturally] on a
principle analogous to that on which the saline or the acid is used
artificially, i.e. for seasoning. These latter are used because they
counteract the tendency of the sweet to be too nutrient, and to
float on the stomach.

As the intermediate colours arise from the mixture of white and
black, so the intermediate savours arise from the Sweet and Bitter;
and these savours, too, severally involve either a definite ratio,
or else an indefinite relation of degree, between their components,
either having certain integral numbers at the basis of their
mixture, and, consequently, of their stimulative effect, or else being
mixed in proportions not arithmetically expressible. The tastes
which give pleasure in their combination are those which have their
components joined in a definite ratio.

The sweet taste alone is Rich, [therefore the latter may be regarded
as a variety of the former], while [so far as both imply privation
of the Sweet] the Saline is fairly identical with the Bitter.
Between the extremes of sweet and bitter come the Harsh, the
Pungent, the Astringent, and the Acid. Savours and Colours, it will be
observed, contain respectively about the same number of species. For
there are seven species of each, if, as is reasonable, we regard Dun
[or Grey] as a variety of Black (for the alternative is that Yellow
should be classed with White, as Rich with Sweet); while [the
irreducible colours, viz.] Crimson, Violet, leek-Green, and deep Blue,
come between White and Black, and from these all others are derived by
mixture.

Again, as Black is a privation of White in the Translucent, so
Saline or Bitter is a privation of Sweet in the Nutrient Moist. This
explains why the ash of all burnt things is bitter; for the potable
[sc. the sweet] moisture has been exuded from them.

Democritus and most of the natural philosophers who treat of
sense-perception proceed quite irrationally, for they represent all
objects of sense as objects of Touch. Yet, if this is really so, it
clearly follows that each of the other senses is a mode of Touch;
but one can see at a glance that this is impossible.

Again, they treat the percepts common to all senses as proper to
one. For [the qualities by which they explain taste viz.] Magnitude
and Figure, Roughness and Smoothness, and, moreover, the Sharpness and
Bluntness found in solid bodies, are percepts common to all the
senses, or if not to all, at least to Sight and Touch. This explains
why it is that the senses are liable to err regarding them, while no
such error arises respecting their proper sensibles; e.g. the sense of
Seeing is not deceived as to Colour, nor is that of Hearing as to
Sound.

On the other hand, they reduce the proper to common sensibles, as
Democritus does with White and Black; for he asserts that the latter
is [a mode of the] rough, and the former [a mode of the] smooth, while
he reduces Savours to the atomic figures. Yet surely no one sense, or,
if any, the sense of Sight rather than any other, can discern the
common sensibles. But if we suppose that the sense of Taste is
better able to do so, then- since to discern the smallest objects in
each kind is what marks the acutest sense-Taste should have been the
sense which best perceived the common sensibles generally, and
showed the most perfect power of discerning figures in general.

Again, all the sensibles involve contrariety; e.g. in Colour White
is contrary to Black, and in Savours Bitter is contrary to Sweet;
but no one figure is reckoned as contrary to any other figure. Else,
to which of the possible polygonal figures [to which Democritus
reduces Bitter] is the spherical figure [to which he reduces Sweet]
contrary?

Again, since figures are infinite in number, savours also should
be infinite; [the possible rejoinder- 'that they are so, only that
some are not perceived'- cannot be sustained] for why should one
savour be perceived, and another not?

This completes our discussion of the object of Taste, i.e. Savour;
for the other affections of Savours are examined in their proper place
in connection with the natural history of Plants.

5

Our conception of the nature of Odours must be analogous to that
of Savours; inasmuch as the Sapid Dry effects in air and water
alike, but in a different province of sense, precisely what the Dry
effects in the Moist of water only. We customarily predicate
Translucency of both air and water in common; but it is not qua
translucent that either is a vehicle of odour, but qua possessed of
a power of washing or rinsing [and so imbibing] the Sapid Dryness.

For the object of Smell exists not in air only: it also exists in
water. This is proved by the case of fishes and testacea, which are
seen to possess the faculty of smell, although water contains no air
(for whenever air is generated within water it rises to the
surface), and these creatures do not respire. Hence, if one were to
assume that air and water are both moist, it would follow that Odour
is the natural substance consisting of the Sapid Dry diffused in the
Moist, and whatever is of this kind would be an object of Smell.

That the property of odorousness is based upon the Sapid may be seen
by comparing the things which possess with those which do not
possess odour. The elements, viz. Fire, Air, Earth, Water, are
inodorous, because both the dry and the moist among them are without
sapidity, unless some added ingredient produces it. This explains
why sea-water possesses odour, for [unlike 'elemental' water] it
contains savour and dryness. Salt, too, is more odorous than natron,
as the oil which exudes from the former proves, for natron is allied
to ['elemental'] earth more nearly than salt. Again, a stone is
inodorous, just because it is tasteless, while, on the contrary,
wood is odorous, because it is sapid. The kinds of wood, too, which
contain more ['elemental'] water are less odorous than others.
Moreover, to take the case of metals, gold is inodorous because it
is without taste, but bronze and iron are odorous; and when the
[sapid] moisture has been burnt out of them, their slag is, in all
cases, less odorous the metals [than the metals themselves]. Silver
and tin are more odorous than the one class of metals, less so than
the other, inasmuch as they are water [to a greater degree than the
former, to a less degree than the latter].

Some writers look upon Fumid exhalation, which is a compound of
Earth and Air, as the essence of Odour. [Indeed all are inclined to
rush to this theory of Odour.] Heraclitus implied his adherence to
it when he declared that if all existing things were turned into
Smoke, the nose would be the organ to discern them with. All writers
incline to refer odour to this cause [sc. exhalation of some sort],
but some regard it as aqueous, others as fumid, exhalation; while
others, again, hold it to be either. Aqueous exhalation is merely a
form of moisture, but fumid exhalation is, as already remarked,
composed of Air and Earth. The former when condensed turns into water;
the latter, in a particular species of earth. Now, it is unlikely that
odour is either of these. For vaporous exhalation consists of mere
water [which, being tasteless, is inodorous]; and fumid exhalation
cannot occur in water at all, though, as has been before stated,
aquatic creatures also have the sense of smell.

Again, the exhalation theory of odour is analogous to the theory
of emanations. If, therefore, the latter is untenable, so, too, is the
former.

It is clearly conceivable that the Moist, whether in air (for air,
too, is essentially moist) or in water, should imbibe the influence
of, and have effects wrought in it by, the Sapid Dryness. Moreover, if
the Dry produces in moist media, i.e. water and air, an effect as of
something washed out in them, it is manifest that odours must be
something analogous to savours. Nay, indeed, this analogy is, in
some instances, a fact [registered in language]; for odours as well as
savours are spoken of as pungent, sweet, harsh, astringent rich
[='savoury']; and one might regard fetid smells as analogous to bitter
tastes; which explains why the former are offensive to inhalation as
the latter are to deglutition. It is clear, therefore, that Odour is
in both water and air what Savour is in water alone. This explains why
coldness and freezing render Savours dull, and abolish odours
altogether; for cooling and freezing tend to annul the kinetic heat
which helps to fabricate sapidity.

There are two species of the Odorous. For the statement of certain
writers that the odorous is not divisible into species is false; it is
so divisible. We must here define the sense in which these species are
to be admitted or denied.

One class of odours, then, is that which runs parallel, as has
been observed, to savours: to odours of this class their
pleasantness or unpleasantness belongs incidentally. For owing to
the fact that Savours are qualities of nutrient matter, the odours
connected with these [e.g. those of a certain food] are agreeable as
long as animals have an appetite for the food, but they are not
agreeable to them when sated and no longer in want of it; nor are they
agreeable, either, to those animals that do not like the food itself
which yields the odours. Hence, as we observed, these odours are
pleasant or unpleasant incidentally, and the same reasoning explains
why it is that they are perceptible to all animals in common.

The other class of odours consists of those agreeable in their
essential nature, e.g. those of flowers. For these do not in any
degree stimulate animals to food, nor do they contribute in any way to
appetite; their effect upon it, if any, is rather the opposite. For
the verse of Strattis ridiculing Euripides-

Use not perfumery to flavour soup,

contains a truth.

Those who nowadays introduce such flavours into beverages deforce
our sense of pleasure by habituating us to them, until, from two
distinct kinds of sensations combined, pleasure arises as it might
from one simple kind.

Of this species of odour man alone is sensible; the other, viz. that
correlated with Tastes, is, as has been said before, perceptible
also to the lower animals. And odours of the latter sort, since
their pleasureableness depends upon taste, are divided into as many
species as there are different tastes; but we cannot go on to say this
of the former kind of odour, since its nature is agreeable or
disagreeable per se. The reason why the perception of such odours is
peculiar to man is found in the characteristic state of man's brain.
For his brain is naturally cold, and the blood which it contains in
its vessels is thin and pure but easily cooled (whence it happens that
the exhalation arising from food, being cooled by the coldness of this
region, produces unhealthy rheums); therefore it is that odours of
such a species have been generated for human beings, as a safeguard to
health. This is their sole function, and that they perform it is
evident. For food, whether dry or moist, though sweet to taste, is
often unwholesome; whereas the odour arising from what is fragrant,
that odour which is pleasant in its own right, is, so to say, always
beneficial to persons in any state of bodily health whatever.

For this reason, too, the perception of odour [in general]
effected through respiration, not in all animals, but in man and
certain other sanguineous animals, e.g. quadrupeds, and all that
participate freely in the natural substance air; because when
odours, on account of the lightness of the heat in them, mount to
the brain, the health of this region is thereby promoted. For odour,
as a power, is naturally heat-giving. Thus Nature has employed
respiration for two purposes: primarily for the relief thereby brought
to the thorax, secondarily for the inhalation of odour. For while an
animal is inhaling,- odour moves in through its nostrils, as it were
'from a side-entrance.'

But the perception of the second class of odours above described
[does not belong to all animal, but] is confined to human beings,
because man's brain is, in proportion to his whole bulk, larger and
moister than the brain of any other animal. This is the reason of
the further fact that man alone, so to speak, among animals
perceives and takes pleasure in the odours of flowers and such things.
For the heat and stimulation set up by these odours are commensurate
with the excess of moisture and coldness in his cerebral region. On
all the other animals which have lungs, Nature has bestowed their
due perception of one of the two kinds of odour [i.e. that connected
with nutrition] through the act of respiration, guarding against the
needless creation of two organs of sense; for in the fact that they
respire the other animals have already sufficient provision for
their perception of the one species of odour only, as human beings
have for their perception of both.

But that creatures which do not respire have the olfactory sense
is evident. For fishes, and all insects as a class, have, thanks to
the species of odour correlated with nutrition, a keen olfactory sense
of their proper food from a distance, even when they are very far away
from it; such is the case with bees, and also with the class of
small ants, which some denominate knipes. Among marine animals, too,
the murex and many other similar animals have an acute perception of
their food by its odour.

It is not equally certain what the organ is whereby they so
perceive. This question, of the organ whereby they perceive odour, may
well cause a difficulty, if we assume that smelling takes place in
animals only while respiring (for that this is the fact is manifest in
all the animals which do respire), whereas none of those just
mentioned respires, and yet they have the sense of smell- unless,
indeed, they have some other sense not included in the ordinary
five. This supposition is, however, impossible. For any sense which
perceives odour is a sense of smell, and this they do perceive, though
probably not in the same way as creatures which respire, but when
the latter are respiring the current of breath removes something
that is laid like a lid upon the organ proper (which explains why they
do not perceive odours when not respiring); while in creatures which
do not respire this is always off: just as some animals have eyelids
on their eyes, and when these are not raised they cannot see,
whereas hard-eyed animals have no lids, and consequently do not
need, besides eyes, an agency to raise the lids, but see straightway
[without intermission] from the actual moment at which it is first
possible for them to do so [i.e. from the moment when an object
first comes within their field of vision].

Consistently with what has been said above, not one of the lower
animals shows repugnance to the odour of things which are
essentially ill-smelling, unless one of the latter is positively
pernicious. They are destroyed, however, by these things, just as
human beings are; i.e. as human beings get headaches from, and are
often asphyxiated by, the fumes of charcoal, so the lower animals
perish from the strong fumes of brimstone and bituminous substances;
and it is owing to experience of such effects that they shun these.
For the disagreeable odour in itself they care nothing whatever
(though the odours of many plants are essentially disagreeable),
unless, indeed, it has some effect upon the taste of their food.

The senses making up an odd number, and an odd number having
always a middle unit, the sense of smell occupies in itself as it were
a middle position between the tactual senses, i.e. Touch and Taste,
and those which perceive through a medium, i.e. Sight and Hearing.
Hence the object of smell, too, is an affection of nutrient substances
(which fall within the class of Tangibles), and is also an affection
of the audible and the visible; whence it is that creatures have the
sense of smell both in air and water. Accordingly, the object of smell
is something common to both of these provinces, i.e. it appertains
both to the tangible on the one hand, and on the other to the
audible and translucent. Hence the propriety of the figure by which it
has been described by us as an immersion or washing of dryness in
the Moist and Fluid. Such then must be our account of the sense in
which one is or is not entitled to speak of the odorous as having
species.

The theory held by certain of the Pythagoreans, that some animals
are nourished by odours alone, is unsound. For, in the first place, we
see that food must be composite, since the bodies nourished by it
are not simple. This explains why waste matter is secreted from
food, either within the organisms, or, as in plants, outside them. But
since even water by itself alone, that is, when unmixed, will not
suffice for food- for anything which is to form a consistency must be
corporeal-, it is still much less conceivable that air should be so
corporealized [and thus fitted to be food]. But, besides this, we
see that all animals have a receptacle for food, from which, when it
has entered, the body absorbs it. Now, the organ which perceives odour
is in the head, and odour enters with the inhalation of the breath; so
that it goes to the respiratory region. It is plain, therefore, that
odour, qua odour, does not contribute to nutrition; that, however,
it is serviceable to health is equally plain, as well by immediate
perception as from the arguments above employed; so that odour is in
relation to general health what savour is in the province of nutrition
and in relation to the bodies nourished.

This then must conclude our discussion of the several organs of
sense-perception.

6

One might ask: if every body is infinitely divisible, are its
sensible qualities- Colour, Savour, Odour, Sound, Weight, Cold or
Heat, [Heaviness or] Lightness, Hardness or Softness-also infinitely
divisible? Or, is this impossible?

[One might well ask this question], because each of them is
productive of sense-perception, since, in fact, all derive their
name [of 'sensible qualities'] from the very circumstance of their
being able to stimulate this. Hence, [if this is so] both our
perception of them should likewise be divisible to infinity, and every
part of a body [however small] should be a perceptible magnitude.
For it is impossible, e.g. to see a thing which is white but not of
a certain magnitude.

Since if it were not so, [if its sensible qualities were not
divisible, pari passu with body], we might conceive a body existing
but having no colour, or weight, or any such quality; accordingly
not perceptible at all. For these qualities are the objects of
sense-perception. On this supposition, every perceptible object should
be regarded as composed not of perceptible [but of imperceptible]
parts. Yet it must [be really composed of perceptible parts], since
assuredly it does not consist of mathematical [and therefore purely
abstract and non-sensible] quantities. Again, by what faculty should
we discern and cognize these [hypothetical real things without
sensible qualities]? Is it by Reason? But they are not objects of
Reason; nor does reason apprehend objects in space, except when it
acts in conjunction with sense-perception. At the same time, if this
be the case [that there are magnitudes, physically real, but without
sensible quality], it seems to tell in favour of the atomistic
hypothesis; for thus, indeed, [by accepting this hypothesis], the
question [with which this chapter begins] might be solved
[negatively]. But it is impossible [to accept this hypothesis]. Our
views on the subject of atoms are to be found in our treatise on
Movement.

The solution of these questions will bring with it also the answer
to the question why the species of Colour, Taste, Sound, and other
sensible qualities are limited. For in all classes of things lying
between extremes the intermediates must be limited. But contraries are
extremes, and every object of sense-perception involves contrariety:
e.g. in Colour, White x Black; in Savour, Sweet x Bitter, and in all
the other sensibles also the contraries are extremes. Now, that
which is continuous is divisible into an infinite number of unequal
parts, but into a finite number of equal parts, while that which is
not per se continuous is divisible into species which are finite in
number. Since then, the several sensible qualities of things are to be
reckoned as species, while continuity always subsists in these, we
must take account of the difference between the Potential and the
Actual. It is owing to this difference that we do not [actually] see
its ten-thousandth part in a grain of millet, although sight has
embraced the whole grain within its scope; and it is owing to this,
too, that the sound contained in a quarter-tone escapes notice, and
yet one hears the whole strain, inasmuch as it is a continuum; but the
interval between the extreme sounds [that bound the quarter-tone]
escapes the ear [being only potentially audible, not actually]. So, in
the case of other objects of sense, extremely small constituents are
unnoticed; because they are only potentially not actually [perceptible
e.g.] visible, unless when they have been parted from the wholes. So
the footlength too exists potentially in the two-foot length, but
actually only when it has been separated from the whole. But objective
increments so small as those above might well, if separated from their
totals, [instead of achieving 'actual' exisistence] be dissolved in
their environments, like a drop of sapid moisture poured out into
the sea. But even if this were not so [sc. with the objective
magnitude], still, since the [subjective] of sense-perception is not
perceptible in itself, nor capable of separate existence (since it
exists only potentially in the more distinctly perceivable whole of
sense-perception), so neither will it be possible to perceive
[actually] its correlatively small object [sc. its quantum of
pathema or sensible quality] when separated from the object-total. But
yet this [small object] is to be considered as perceptible: for it
is both potentially so already [i.e. even when alone], and destined to
be actually so when it has become part of an aggregate. Thus,
therefore, we have shown that some magnitudes and their sensible
qualities escape notice, and the reason why they do so, as well as the
manner in which they are still perceptible or not perceptible in
such cases. Accordingly then when these [minutely subdivided]
sensibles have once again become aggregated in a whole in such a
manner, relatively to one another, as to be perceptible actually,
and not merely because they are in the whole, but even apart from
it, it follows necessarily [from what has been already stated] that
their sensible qualities, whether colours or tastes or sounds, are
limited in number.

One might ask:- do the objects of sense-perception, or the
movements proceeding from them ([since movements there are,] in
whichever of the two ways [viz. by emanations or by stimulatory
kinesis] sense-perception takes place), when these are actualized
for perception, always arrive first at a spatial middle point [between
the sense-organ and its object], as Odour evidently does, and also
Sound? For he who is nearer [to the odorous object] perceives the
Odour sooner [than who is farther away], and the Sound of a stroke
reaches us some time after it has been struck. Is it thus also with an
object seen, and with Light? Empedocles, for example, says that the
Light from the Sun arrives first in the intervening space before it
comes to the eye, or reaches the Earth. This might plausibly seem to
be the case. For whatever is moved [in space], is moved from one place
to another; hence there must be a corresponding interval of time
also in which it is moved from the one place to the other. But any
given time is divisible into parts; so that we should assume a time
when the sun's ray was not as yet seen, but was still travelling in
the middle space.

Now, even if it be true that the acts of 'hearing' and 'having
heard', and, generally, those of 'perceiving' and 'having
perceived', form co-instantaneous wholes, in other words, that acts of
sense-perception do not involve a process of becoming, but have
their being none the less without involving such a process; yet,
just as, [in the case of sound], though the stroke which causes the
Sound has been already struck, the Sound is not yet at the ear (and
that this last is a fact is further proved by the transformation which
the letters [viz. the consonants as heard] undergo [in the case of
words spoken from a distance], implying that the local movement
[involved in Sound] takes place in the space between [us and the
speaker]; for the reason why [persons addressed from a distance] do
not succeed in catching the sense of what is said is evidently that
the air [sound wave] in moving towards them has its form changed)
[granting this, then, the question arises]: is the same also true in
the case of Colour and Light? For certainly it is not true that the
beholder sees, and the object is seen, in virtue of some merely
abstract relationship between them, such as that between equals. For
if it were so, there would be no need [as there is] that either [the
beholder or the thing beheld] should occupy some particular place;
since to the equalization of things their being near to, or far
from, one another makes no difference.

Now this [travelling through successive positions in the medium] may
with good reason take place as regards Sound and Odour, for these,
like [their media] Air and Water, are continuous, but the movement
of both is divided into parts. This too is the ground of the fact that
the object which the person first in order of proximity hears or
smells is the same as that which each subsequent person perceives,
while yet it is not the same.

Some, indeed, raise a question also on these very points; they
declare it impossible that one person should hear, or see, or smell,
the same object as another, urging the impossibility of several
persons in different places hearing or smelling [the same object], for
the one same thing would [thus] be divided from itself. The answer
is that, in perceiving the object which first set up the motion- e.g.
a bell, or frankincense, or fire- all perceive an object numerically
one and the same; while, of course, in the special object perceived
they perceive an object numerically different for each, though
specifically the same for all; and this, accordingly, explains how it
is that many persons together see, or smell, or hear [the same
object]. These things [the odour or sound proper] are not bodies, but
an affection or process of some kind (otherwise this [viz.
simultaneous perception of the one object by many] would not have
been, as it is, a fact of experience) though, on the other hand, they
each imply a body [as their cause].

But [though sound and odour may travel,] with regard to Light the
case is different. For Light has its raison d'etre in the being [not
becoming] of something, but it is not a movement. And in general, even
in qualitative change the case is different from what it is in local
movement [both being different species of kinesis]. Local movements,
of course, arrive first at a point midway before reaching their goal
(and Sound, it is currently believed, is a movement of something
locally moved), but we cannot go on to assert this [arrival at a point
midway] like manner of things which undergo qualitative change. For
this kind of change may conceivably take place in a thing all at once,
without one half of it being changed before the other; e.g. it is
conceivable that water should be frozen simultaneously in every
part. But still, for all that, if the body which is heated or frozen
is extensive, each part of it successively is affected by the part
contiguous, while the part first changed in quality is so changed by
the cause itself which originates the change, and thus the change
throughout the whole need not take place coinstantaneously and all
at once. Tasting would have been as smelling now is, if we lived in
a liquid medium, and perceived [the sapid object] at a distance,
before touching it.

Naturally, then, the parts of media between a sensory organ and
its object are not all affected at once- except in the case of Light
[illumination] for the reason above stated, and also in the case of
seeing, for the same reason; for Light is an efficient cause of
seeing.

7

Another question respecting sense-perception is as follows:
assuming, as is natural, that of two [simultaneous] sensory stimuli
the stronger always tends to extrude the weaker [from
consciousness], is it conceivable or not that one should be able to
discern two objects coinstantaneously in the same individual time? The
above assumption explains why persons do not perceive what is
brought before their eyes, if they are at the time deep in thought, or
in a fright, or listening to some loud noise. This assumption, then,
must be made, and also the following: that it is easier to discern
each object of sense when in its simple form than when an ingredient
in a mixture; easier, for example, to discern wine when neat than when
blended, and so also honey, and [in other provinces] a colour, or to
discern the nete by itself alone, than [when sounded with the
hypate] in the octave; the reason being that component elements tend
to efface [the distinctive characteristics of] one another. Such is
the effect [on one another] of all ingredients of which, when
compounded, some one thing is formed.

If, then, the greater stimulus tends to expel the less, it
necessarily follows that, when they concur, this greater should itself
too be less distinctly perceptible than if it were alone, since the
less by blending with it has removed some of its individuality,
according to our assumption that simple objects are in all cases
more distinctly perceptible.

Now, if the two stimuli are equal but heterogeneous, no perception
of either will ensue; they will alike efface one another's
characteristics. But in such a case the perception of either
stimulus in its simple form is impossible. Hence either there will
then be no sense-perception at all, or there will be a perception
compounded of both and differing from either. The latter is what
actually seems to result from ingredients blended together, whatever
may be the compound in which they are so mixed.

Since, then, from some concurrent [sensory stimuli] a resultant
object is produced, while from others no such resultant is produced,
and of the latter sort are those things which belong to different
sense provinces (for only those things are capable of mixture whose
extremes are contraries, and no one compound can be formed from,
e.g. White and Sharp, except indirectly, i.e. not as a concord is
formed of Sharp and Grave); there follows logically the
impossibility of discerning such concurrent stimuli coinstantaneously.
For we must suppose that the stimuli, when equal, tend alike to efface
one another, since no one [form of stimulus] results from them; while,
if they are unequal, the stronger alone is distinctly perceptible.

Again, the soul would be more likely to perceive
coinstantaneously, with one and the same sensory act, two things in
the same sensory province, such as the Grave and the Sharp in sound;
for the sensory stimulation in this one province is more likely to
be unitemporal than that involving two different provinces, as Sight
and Hearing. But it is impossible to perceive two objects
coinstantaneously in the same sensory act unless they have been mixed,
[when, however, they are no longer two], for their amalgamation
involves their becoming one, and the sensory act related to one object
is itself one, and such act, when one, is, of course,
coinstantaneous with itself. Hence, when things are mixed we of
necessity perceive them coinstantaneously: for we perceive them by a
perception actually one. For an object numerically one means that
which is perceived by a perception actually one, whereas an object
specifically one means that which is perceived by a sensory act
potentially one [i.e. by an energeia of the same sensuous faculty]. If
then the actualized perception is one, it will declare its data to
be one object; they must, therefore, have been mixed. Accordingly,
when they have not been mixed, the actualized perceptions which
perceive them will be two; but [if so, their perception must be
successive not coinstantaneous, for] in one and the same faculty the
perception actualized at any single moment is necessarily one, only
one stimulation or exertion of a single faculty being possible at a
single instant, and in the case supposed here the faculty is one. It
follows, therefore, that we cannot conceive the possibility of
perceiving two distinct objects coinstantaneously with one and the
same sense.

But if it be thus impossible to perceive coinstantaneously two
objects in the same province of sense if they are really two,
manifestly it is still less conceivable that we should perceive
coinstantaneously objects in two different sensory provinces, as White
and Sweet. For it appears that when the Soul predicates numerical
unity it does so in virtue of nothing else than such coinstantaneous
perception [of one object, in one instant, by one energeia]: while
it predicates specific unity in virtue of [the unity of] the
discriminating faculty of sense together with [the unity of] the
mode in which this operates. What I mean, for example, is this; the
same sense no doubt discerns White and Black, [which are hence
generically one] though specifically different from one another, and
so, too, a faculty of sense self-identical, but different from the
former, discerns Sweet and Bitter; but while both these faculties
differ from one another [and each from itself] in their modes of
discerning either of their respective contraries, yet in perceiving
the co-ordinates in each province they proceed in manners analogous to
one another; for instance, as Taste perceives Sweet, so Sight
perceives White; and as the latter perceives Black, so the former
perceives Bitter.

Again, if the stimuli of sense derived from Contraries are
themselves Contrary, and if Contraries cannot be conceived as
subsisting together in the same individual subject, and if Contraries,
e.g. Sweet and Bitter, come under one and the same sense-faculty, we
must conclude that it is impossible to discern them coinstantaneously.
It is likewise clearly impossible so to discern such homogeneous
sensibles as are not [indeed] Contrary, [but are yet of different
species]. For these are, [in the sphere of colour, for instance],
classed some with White, others with Black, and so it is, likewise, in
the other provinces of sense; for example, of savours, some are
classed with Sweet, and others with Bitter. Nor can one discern the
components in compounds coinstantaneously (for these are ratios of
Contraries, as e.g. the Octave or the Fifth); unless, indeed, on
condition of perceiving them as one. For thus, and not otherwise,
the ratios of the extreme sounds are compounded into one ratio:
since we should have together the ratio, on the one hand, of Many to
Few or of Odd to Even, on the other, that of Few to Many or of Even to
Odd [and these, to be perceived together, must be unified].

If, then, the sensibles denominated co-ordinates though in different
provinces of sense (e.g. I call Sweet and White co-ordinates though in
different provinces) stand yet more aloof, and differ more, from one
another than do any sensibles in the same province; while Sweet
differs from White even more than Black does from White, it is still
less conceivable that one should discern them [viz. sensibles in
different sensory provinces whether co-ordinates or not]
coinstantaneously than sensibles which are in the same province.
Therefore, if coinstantaneous perception of the latter be
impossible, that of the former is a fortiori impossible.

Some of the writers who treat of concords assert that the sounds
combined in these do not reach us simultaneously, but only appear to
do so, their real successiveness being unnoticed whenever the time
it involves is [so small as to be] imperceptible. Is this true or not?
One might perhaps, following this up, go so far as to say that even
the current opinion that one sees and hears coinstantaneously is due
merely to the fact that the intervals of time [between the really
successive perceptions of sight and hearing] escape observation. But
this can scarcely be true, nor is it conceivable that any portion of
time should be [absolutely] imperceptible, or that any should be
absolutely unnoticeable; the truth being that it is possible to
perceive every instant of time. [This is so]; because, if it is
inconceivable that a person should, while perceiving himself or
aught else in a continuous time, be at any instant unaware of his
own existence; while, obviously, the assumption, that there is in
the time-continuum a time so small as to be absolutely
imperceptible, carries the implication that a person would, during
such time, be unaware of his own existence, as well as of his seeing
and perceiving; [this assumption must be false].

Again, if there is any magnitude, whether time or thing,
absolutely imperceptible owing to its smallness, it follows that there
would not be either a thing which one perceives, or a time in which
one perceives it, unless in the sense that in some part of the given
time he sees some part of the given thing. For [let there be a line
ab, divided into two parts at g, and let this line represent a whole
object and a corresponding whole time. Now,] if one sees the whole
line, and perceives it during a time which forms one and the same
continuum, only in the sense that he does so in some portion of this
time, let us suppose the part gb, representing a time in which by
supposition he was perceiving nothing, cut off from the whole. Well,
then, he perceives in a certain part [viz. in the remainder] of the
time, or perceives a part [viz. the remainder] of the line, after
the fashion in which one sees the whole earth by seeing some given
part of it, or walks in a year by walking in some given part of the
year. But [by hypothesis] in the part bg he perceives nothing:
therefore, in fact, he is said to perceive the whole object and during
the whole time simply because he perceives [some part of the object]
in some part of the time ab. But the same argument holds also in the
case of ag [the remainder, regarded in its turn as a whole]; for it
will be found [on this theory of vacant times and imperceptible
magnitudes] that one always perceives only in some part of a given
whole time, and perceives only some part of a whole magnitude, and
that it is impossible to perceive any [really] whole [object in a
really whole time; a conclusion which is absurd, as it would logically
annihilate the perception of both Objects and Time].

Therefore we must conclude that all magnitudes are perceptible,
but their actual dimensions do not present themselves immediately in
their presentation as objects. One sees the sun, or a four-cubit rod
at a distance, as a magnitude, but their exact dimensions are not
given in their visual presentation: nay, at times an object of sight
appears indivisible, but [vision like other special senses, is
fallible respecting 'common sensibles', e.g. magnitude, and] nothing
that one sees is really indivisible. The reason of this has been
previously explained. It is clear then, from the above arguments, that
no portion of time is imperceptible.

But we must here return to the question proposed above for
discussion, whether it is possible or impossible to perceive several
objects coinstantaneously; by 'coinstantaneously' I mean perceiving
the several objects in a time one and indivisible relatively to one
another, i.e. indivisible in a sense consistent with its being all a
continuum.

First, then, is it conceivable that one should perceive the
different things coinstantaneously, but each with a different part
of the Soul? Or [must we object] that, in the first place, to begin
with the objects of one and the same sense, e.g. Sight, if we assume
it [the Soul qua exercising Sight] to perceive one colour with one
part, and another colour with a different part, it will have a
plurality of parts the same in species, [as they must be,] since the
objects which it thus perceives fall within the same genus?

Should any one [to illustrate how the Soul might have in it two
different parts specifically identical, each directed to a set of
aistheta the same in genus with that to which the other is directed]
urge that, as there are two eyes, so there may be in the Soul
something analogous, [the reply is] that of the eyes, doubtless,
some one organ is formed, and hence their actualization in
perception is one; but if this is so in the Soul, then, in so far as
what is formed of both [i.e. of any two specifically identical parts
as assumed] is one, the true perceiving subject also will be one, [and
the contradictory of the above hypothesis (of different parts of
Soul remaining engaged in simultaneous perception with one sense) is
what emerges from the analogy]; while if the two parts of Soul
remain separate, the analogy of the eyes will fail, [for of these some
one is really formed].

Furthermore, [on the supposition of the need of different parts of
Soul, co-operating in each sense, to discern different objects
coinstantaneously], the senses will be each at the same time one and
many, as if we should say that they were each a set of diverse
sciences; for neither will an 'activity' exist without its proper
faculty, nor without activity will there be sensation.

But if the Soul does not, in the way suggested [i.e. with
different parts of itself acting simultaneously], perceive in one
and the same individual time sensibles of the same sense, a fortiori
it is not thus that it perceives sensibles of different senses. For it
is, as already stated, more conceivable that it should perceive a
plurality of the former together in this way than a plurality of
heterogeneous objects.

If then, as is the fact, the Soul with one part perceives Sweet,
with another, White, either that which results from these is some
one part, or else there is no such one resultant. But there must be
such an one, inasmuch as the general faculty of sense-perception is
one. What one object, then, does that one faculty [when perceiving
an object, e.g. as both White and Sweet] perceive? [None]; for
assuredly no one object arises by composition of these
[heterogeneous objects, such as White and Sweet]. We must conclude,
therefore, that there is, as has been stated before, some one
faculty in the soul with which the latter perceives all its
percepts, though it perceives each different genus of sensibles
through a different organ.

May we not, then, conceive this faculty which perceives White and
Sweet to be one qua indivisible [sc. qua combining its different
simultaneous objects] in its actualization, but different, when it has
become divisible [sc. qua distinguishing its different simultaneous
objects] in its actualization?

Or is what occurs in the case of the perceiving Soul conceivably
analogous to what holds true in that of the things themselves? For the
same numerically one thing is white and sweet, and has many other
qualities, [while its numerical oneness is not thereby prejudiced]
if the fact is not that the qualities are really separable in the
object from one another, but that the being of each quality is
different [from that of every other]. In the same way therefore we
must assume also, in the case of the Soul, that the faculty of
perception in general is in itself numerically one and the same, but
different [differentiated] in its being; different, that is to say, in
genus as regards some of its objects, in species as regards others.
Hence too, we may conclude that one can perceive [numerically
different objects] coinstantaneously with a faculty which is
numerically one and the same, but not the same in its relationship
[sc. according as the objects to which it is directed are not the
same].

That every sensible object is a magnitude, and that nothing which it
is possible to perceive is indivisible, may be thus shown. The
distance whence an object could not be seen is indeterminate, but that
whence it is visible is determinate. We may say the same of the
objects of Smelling and Hearing, and of all sensibles not discerned by
actual contact. Now, there is, in the interval of distance, some
extreme place, the last from which the object is invisible, and the
first from which it is visible. This place, beyond which if the object
be one cannot perceive it, while if the object be on the hither side
one must perceive it, is, I presume, itself necessarily indivisible.
Therefore, if any sensible object be indivisible, such object, if
set in the said extreme place whence imperceptibility ends and
perceptibility begins, will have to be both visible and invisible
their objects, whether regarded in general or at the same time; but
this is impossible.

This concludes our survey of the characteristics of the organs of
Sense-perception and their objects, whether regarded in general or
in relation to each organ. Of the remaining subjects, we must first
consider that of memory and remembering.

-THE END-
.
350 BC

ON SLEEP AND SLEEPLESSNESS

by Aristotle

translated by J. I. Beare

1

WITH regard to sleep and waking, we must consider what they are:
whether they are peculiar to soul or to body, or common to both; and
if common, to what part of soul or body they appertain: further,
from what cause it arises that they are attributes of animals, and
whether all animals share in them both, or some partake of the one
only, others of the other only, or some partake of neither and some of
both.

Further, in addition to these questions, we must also inquire what
the dream is, and from what cause sleepers sometimes dream, and
sometimes do not; or whether the truth is that sleepers always dream
but do not always remember (their dream); and if this occurs, what its
explanation is.

Again, [we must inquire] whether it is possible or not to foresee
the future (in dreams), and if it be possible, in what manner;
further, whether, supposing it possible, it extends only to things
to be accomplished by the agency of Man, or to those also of which the
cause lies in supra-human agency, and which result from the workings
of Nature, or of Spontaneity.

First, then, this much is clear, that waking and sleep appertain
to the same part of an animal, inasmuch as they are opposites, and
sleep is evidently a privation of waking. For contraries, in natural
as well as in all other matters, are seen always to present themselves
in the same subject, and to be affections of the same: examples
are-health and sickness, beauty and ugliness, strength and weakness,
sight and blindness, hearing and deafness. This is also clear from the
following considerations. The criterion by which we know the waking
person to be awake is identical with that by which we know the sleeper
to be asleep; for we assume that one who is exercising
sense-perception is awake, and that every one who is awake perceives
either some external movement or else some movement in his own
consciousness. If waking, then, consists in nothing else than the
exercise of sense-perception, the inference is clear, that the
organ, in virtue of which animals perceive, is that by which they
wake, when they are awake, or sleep, when they are awake, or sleep,
when they are asleep.

But since the exercise of sense-perception does not belong to soul
or body exclusively, then (since the subject of actuality is in
every case identical with that of potentiality, and what is called
sense-perception, as actuality, is a movement of the soul through
the body) it is clear that its affection is not an affection of soul
exclusively, and that a soulless body has not the potentiality of
perception. [Thus sleep and waking are not attributes of pure
intelligence, on the one hand, or of inanimate bodies, on the other.]

Now, whereas we have already elsewhere distinguished what are called
the parts of the soul, and whereas the nutrient is, in all living
bodies, capable of existing without the other parts, while none of the
others can exist without the nutrient; it is clear that sleep and
waking are not affections of such living things as partake only of
growth and decay, e.g. not of plants, because these have not the
faculty of sense-perception, whether or not this be capable of
separate existence; in its potentiality, indeed, and in its
relationships, it is separable.

Likewise it is clear that [of those which either sleep or wake]
there is no animal which is always awake or always asleep, but that
both these affections belong [alternately] to the same animals. For if
there be an animal not endued with sense-perception, it is
impossible that this should either sleep or wake; since both these are
affections of the activity of the primary faculty of sense-perception.
But it is equally impossible also that either of these two
affections should perpetually attach itself to the same animal, e.g.
that some species of animal should be always asleep or always awake,
without intermission; for all organs which have a natural function
must lose power when they work beyond the natural time-limit of
their working period; for instance, the eyes [must lose power] from
[too long continued] seeing, and must give it up; and so it is with
the hand and every other member which has a function. Now, if
sense-perception is the function of a special organ, this also, if
it continues perceiving beyond the appointed time-limit of its
continuous working period, will lose its power, and will do its work
no longer. Accordingly, if the waking period is determined by this
fact, that in it sense-perception is free; if in the case of some
contraries one of the two must be present, while in the case of others
this is not necessary; if waking is the contrary of sleeping, and
one of these two must be present to every animal: it must follow
that the state of sleeping is necessary. Finally, if such affection is
Sleep, and this is a state of powerlessness arising from excess of
waking, and excess of waking is in its origin sometimes morbid,
sometimes not, so that the powerlessness or dissolution of activity
will be so or not; it is inevitable that every creature which wakes
must also be capable of sleeping, since it is impossible that it
should continue actualizing its powers perpetually.

So, also, it is impossible for any animal to continue always
sleeping. For sleep is an affection of the organ of
sense-perception--a sort of tie or inhibition of function imposed on
it, so that every creature that sleeps must needs have the organ of
sense-perception. Now, that alone which is capable of sense-perception
in actuality has the faculty of sense-perception; but to realize
this faculty, in the proper and unqualified sense, is impossible while
one is asleep. All sleep, therefore, must be susceptible of awakening.
Accordingly, almost all other animals are clearly observed to
partake in sleep, whether they are aquatic, aerial, or terrestrial,
since fishes of all kinds, and molluscs, as well as all others which
have eyes, have been seen sleeping. 'Hard-eyed' creatures and
insects manifestly assume the posture of sleep; but the sleep of all
such creatures is of brief duration, so that often it might well
baffle one's observation to decide whether they sleep or not. Of
testaceous animals, on the contrary, no direct sensible evidence is as
yet forthcoming to determine whether they sleep, but if the above
reasoning be convincing to any one, he who follows it will admit
this [viz. that they do so.]

That, therefore, all animals sleep may be gathered from these
considerations. For an animal is defined as such by its possessing
sense-perception; and we assert that sleep is, in a certain way, an
inhibition of function, or, as it were, a tie, imposed on
sense-perception, while its loosening or remission constitutes the
being awake. But no plant can partake in either of these affections,
for without sense-perception there is neither sleeping nor waking. But
creatures which have sense-perception have likewise the feeling of
pain and pleasure, while those which have these have appetite as well;
but plants have none of these affections. A mark of this is that the
nutrient part does its own work better when (the animal) is asleep
than when it is awake. Nutrition and growth are then especially
promoted, a fact which implies that creatures do not need
sense-perception to assist these processes.

2

We must now proceed to inquire into the cause why one sleeps and
wakes, and into the particular nature of the sense-perception, or
sense-perceptions, if there be several, on which these affections
depend. Since, then, some animals possess all the modes of
sense-perception, and some not all, not, for example, sight, while all
possess touch and taste, except such animals as are imperfectly
developed, a class of which we have already treated in our work on the
soul; and since an animal when asleep is unable to exercise, in the
simple sense any particular sensory faculty whatever, it follows
that in the state called sleep the same affection must extend to all
the special senses; because, if it attaches itself to one of them
but not to another, then an animal while asleep may perceive with
the latter; but this is impossible.

Now, since every sense has something peculiar, and also something
common; peculiar, as, e.g. seeing is to the sense of sight, hearing to
the auditory sense, and so on with the other senses severally; while
all are accompanied by a common power, in virtue whereof a person
perceives that he sees or hears (for, assuredly, it is not by the
special sense of sight that one sees that he sees; and it is not by
mere taste, or sight, or both together that one discerns, and has
the faculty of discerning, that sweet things are different from
white things, but by a faculty connected in common with all the organs
of sense; for there is one sensory function, and the controlling
sensory faculty is one, though differing as a faculty of perception in
relation to each genus of sensibles, e.g. sound or colour); and
since this [common sensory activity] subsists in association chiefly
with the faculty of touch (for this can exist apart from all the other
organs of sense, but none of them can exist apart from it-a subject of
which we have treated in our speculations concerning the Soul); it
is therefore evident that waking and sleeping are an affection of this
[common and controlling organ of sense-perception]. This explains
why they belong to all animals, for touch [with which this common
organ is chiefly connected], alone, [is common] to all [animals].

For if sleeping were caused by the special senses having each and
all undergone some affection, it would be strange that these senses,
for which it is neither necessary nor in a manner possible to
realize their powers simultaneously, should necessarily all go idle
and become motionless simultaneously. For the contrary experience,
viz. that they should not go to rest altogether, would have been
more reasonably anticipated. But, according to the explanation just
given, all is quite clear regarding those also. For, when the sense
organ which controls all the others, and to which all the others are
tributary, has been in some way affected, that these others should
be all affected at the same time is inevitable, whereas, if one of the
tributaries becomes powerless, that the controlling organ should
also become powerless need in no wise follow.

It is indeed evident from many considerations that sleep does not
consist in the mere fact that the special senses do not function or
that one does not employ them; and that it does not consist merely
in an inability to exercise the sense-perceptions; for such is what
happens in cases of swooning. A swoon means just such impotence of
perception, and certain other cases of unconsciousness also are of
this nature. Moreover, persons who have the bloodvessels in the neck
compressed become insensible. But sleep supervenes when such
incapacity of exercise has neither arisen in some casual organ of
sense, nor from some chance cause, but when, as has been just
stated, it has its seat in the primary organ with which one
perceives objects in general. For when this has become powerless all
the other sensory organs also must lack power to perceive; but when
one of them has become powerless, it is not necessary for this also to
lose its power.

We must next state the cause to which it is due, and its quality
as an affection. Now, since there are several types of cause (for we
assign equally the 'final', the 'efficient', the 'material', and the
'formal' as causes), in the first place, then, as we assert that
Nature operates for the sake of an end, and that this end is a good;
and that to every creature which is endowed by nature with the power
to move, but cannot with pleasure to itself move always and
continuously, rest is necessary and beneficial; and since, taught by
experience, men apply to sleep this metaphorical term, calling it a
'rest' [from the strain of movement implied in sense-perception]: we
conclude that its end is the conservation of animals. But the waking
state is for an animal its highest end, since the exercise of
sense-perception or of thought is the highest end for all beings to
which either of these appertains; inasmuch as these are best, and
the highest end is what is best: whence it follows that sleep
belongs of necessity to each animal. I use the term 'necessity' in its
conditional sense, meaning that if an animal is to exist and have
its own proper nature, it must have certain endowments; and, if
these are to belong to it, certain others likewise must belong to it
[as their condition.]

The next question to be discussed is that of the kind of movement or
action, taking place within their bodies, from which the affection
of waking or sleeping arises in animals. Now, we must assume that
the causes of this affection in all other animals are identical
with, or analogous to, those which operate in sanguineous animals; and
that the causes operating in sanguineous animals generally are
identical with those operating in man. Hence we must consider the
entire subject in the light of these instances [afforded by
sanguineous animals, especially man]. Now, it has been definitely
settled already in another work that sense-perception in animals
originates ill the same part of the organism in which movement
originates. This locus of origination is one of three determinate
loci, viz. that which lies midway between the head and the abdomen.
This is sanguineous animals is the region of the heart; for all
sanguineous animals have a heart; and from this it is that both motion
and the controlling sense-perception originate. Now, as regards
movement, it is obvious that that of breathing and of the cooling
process generally takes its rise there; and it is with a view to the
conservation of the [due amount of] heat in this part that nature
has formed as she has both the animals which respire, and those
which cool themselves by moisture. Of this [cooling process] per se we
shall treat hereafter. In bloodless animals, and insects, and such
as do not respire, the 'connatural spirit' is seen alternately
puffed up and subsiding in the part which is in them analogous [to the
region of the heart in sanguineous animals]. This is clearly
observable in the holoptera [insects with undivided wings] as wasps
and bees; also in flies and such creatures. And since to move
anything, or do anything, is impossible without strength, and
holding the breath produces strength-in creatures which inhale, the
holding of that breath which comes from without, but, in creatures
which do not respire, of that which is connatural (which explains
why winged insects of the class holoptera, when they move, are
perceived to make a humming noise, due to the friction of the
connatural spirit colliding with the diaphragm); and since movement
is, in every animal, attended with some sense-perception, either
internal or external, in the primary organ of sense, [we conclude]
accordingly that if sleeping and waking are affections of this
organ, the place in which, or the organ in which, sleep and waking
originate, is self-evident [being that in which movement and
sense-perception originate, viz. the heart].

Some persons move in their sleep, and perform many acts like
waking acts, but not without a phantasm or an exercise of
sense-perception; for a dream is in a certain way a
sense-impression. But of them we have to speak later on. Why it is
that persons when aroused remember their dreams, but do not remember
these acts which are like waking acts, has been already explained in
the work 'Of Problems'.

3

The point for consideration next in order to the preceding
is:-What are the processes in which the affection of waking and
sleeping originates, and whence do they arise? Now, since it is when
it has sense-perception that an animal must first take food and
receive growth, and in all cases food in its ultimate form is, in
sanguineous animals, the natural substance blood, or, in bloodless
animals, that which is analogous to this; and since the veins are
the place of the blood, while the origin of these is the heart-an
assertion which is proved by anatomy-it is manifest that, when the
external nutriment enters the parts fitted for its reception, the
evaporation arising from it enters into the veins, and there,
undergoing a change, is converted into blood, and makes its way to
their source [the heart]. We have treated of all this when
discussing the subject of nutrition, but must here recapitulate what
was there said, in order that we may obtain a scientific view of the
beginnings of the process, and come to know what exactly happens to
the primary organ of sense-perception to account for the occurrence of
waking and sleep. For sleep, as has been shown, is not any given
impotence of the perceptive faculty; for unconsciousness, a certain
form of asphyxia, and swooning, all produce such impotence. Moreover
it is an established fact that some persons in a profound trance
have still had the imaginative faculty in play. This last point,
indeed, gives rise to a difficulty; for if it is conceivable that
one who had swooned should in this state fall asleep, the phantasm
also which then presented itself to his mind might be regarded as a
dream. Persons, too, who have fallen into a deep trance, and have come
to be regarded as dead, say many things while in this condition. The
same view, however, is to be taken of all these cases, [i.e. that they
are not cases of sleeping or dreaming].

As we observed above, sleep is not co-extensive with any and every
impotence of the perceptive faculty, but this affection is one which
arises from the evaporation attendant upon the process of nutrition.
The matter evaporated must be driven onwards to a certain point,
then turn back, and change its current to and fro, like a tide-race in
a narrow strait. Now, in every animal the hot naturally tends to
move [and carry other things] upwards, but when it has reached the
parts above [becoming cool], it turns back again, and moves
downwards in a mass. This explains why fits of drowsiness are
especially apt to come on after meals; for the matter, both the liquid
and the corporeal, which is borne upwards in a mass, is then of
considerable quantity. When, therefore, this comes to a stand it
weighs a person down and causes him to nod, but when it has actually
sunk downwards, and by its return has repulsed the hot, sleep comes
on, and the animal so affected is presently asleep. A confirmation
of this appears from considering the things which induce sleep; they
all, whether potable or edible, for instance poppy, mandragora,
wine, darnel, produce a heaviness in the head; and persons borne
down [by sleepiness] and nodding [drowsily] all seem affected in
this way, i.e. they are unable to lift up the head or the eye-lids.
And it is after meals especially that sleep comes on like this, for
the evaporation from the foods eaten is then copious. It also
follows certain forms of fatigue; for fatigue operates as a solvent,
and the dissolved matter acts, if not cold, like food prior to
digestion. Moreover, some kinds of illness have this same effect;
those arising from moist and hot secretions, as happens with
fever-patients and in cases of lethargy. Extreme youth also has this
effect; infants, for example, sleep a great deal, because of the
food being all borne upwards-a mark whereof appears in the
disproportionately large size of the upper parts compared with the
lower during infancy, which is due to the fact that growth
predominates in the direction of the former. Hence also they are
subject to epileptic seizures; for sleep is like epilepsy, and, in a
sense, actually is a seizure of this sort. Accordingly, the
beginning of this malady takes place with many during sleep, and their
subsequent habitual seizures occur in sleep, not in waking hours.
For when the spirit [evaporation] moves upwards in a volume, on its
return downwards it distends the veins, and forcibly compresses the
passage through which respiration is effected. This explains why wines
are not good for infants or for wet nurses (for it makes no
difference, doubtless, whether the infants themselves, or their
nurses, drink them), but such persons should drink them [if at all]
diluted with water and in small quantity. For wine is spirituous,
and of all wines the dark more so than any other. The upper parts,
in infants, are so filled with nutriment that within five months
[after birth] they do not even turn the neck [sc. to raise the
head]; for in them, as in persons deeply intoxicated, there is ever
a large quantity of moisture ascending. It is reasonable, too, to
think that this affection is the cause of the embryo's remaining at
rest in the womb at first. Also, as a general rule, persons whose
veins are inconspicuous, as well as those who are dwarf-like, or
have abnormally large heads, are addicted to sleep. For in the
former the veins are narrow, so that it is not easy for the moisture
to flow down through them; while in the case of dwarfs and those whose
heads are abnormally large, the impetus of the evaporation upwards
is excessive. Those [on the contrary] whose veins are large are,
thanks to the easy flow through the veins, not addicted to sleep,
unless, indeed, they labour under some other affection which
counteracts [this easy flow]. Nor are the 'atrabilious' addicted to
sleep, for in them the inward region is cooled so that the quantity of
evaporation in their case is not great. For this reason they have
large appetites, though spare and lean; for their bodily condition
is as if they derived no benefit from what they eat. The dark bile,
too, being itself naturally cold, cools also the nutrient tract, and
the other parts wheresoever such secretion is potentially present
[i.e. tends to be formed].

Hence it is plain from what has been said that sleep is a sort of
concentration, or natural recoil, of the hot matter inwards [towards
its centre], due to the cause above mentioned. Hence restless movement
is a marked feature in the case of a person when drowsy. But where
it [the heat in the upper and outer parts] begins to fail, he grows
cool, and owing to this cooling process his eye-lids droop.
Accordingly [in sleep] the upper and outward parts are cool, but the
inward and lower, i.e. the parts at the feet and in the interior of
the body, are hot.

Yet one might found a difficulty on the facts that sleep is most
oppressive in its onset after meals, and that wine, and other such
things, though they possess heating properties, are productive of
sleep, for it is not probable that sleep should be a process of
cooling while the things that cause sleeping are themselves hot. Is
the explanation of this, then, to be found in the fact that, as the
stomach when empty is hot, while replenishment cools it by the
movement it occasions, so the passages and tracts in the head are
cooled as the 'evaporation' ascends thither? Or, as those who have hot
water poured on them feel a sudden shiver of cold, just so in the case
before us, may it be that, when the hot substance ascends, the cold
rallying to meet it cools [the aforesaid parts] deprives their
native heat of all its power, and compels it to retire? Moreover, when
much food is taken, which [i.e. the nutrient evaporation from which]
the hot substance carries upwards, this latter, like a fire when fresh
logs are laid upon it, is itself cooled, until the food has been
digested.

For, as has been observed elsewhere, sleep comes on when the
corporeal element [in the 'evaporation'] conveyed upwards by the
hot, along the veins, to the head. But when that which has been thus
carried up can no longer ascend, but is too great in quantity [to do
so], it forces the hot back again and flows downwards. Hence it is
that men sink down [as they do in sleep] when the heat which tends
to keep them erect (man alone, among animals, being naturally erect)
is withdrawn; and this, when it befalls them, causes
unconsciousness, and afterwards phantasy.

Or are the solutions thus proposed barely conceivable accounts of
the refrigeration which takes place, while, as a matter of fact, the
region of the brain is, as stated elsewhere, the main determinant of
the matter? For the brain, or in creatures without a brain that
which corresponds to it, is of all parts of the body the coolest.
Therefore, as moisture turned into vapour by the sun's heat is, when
it has ascended to the upper regions, cooled by the coldness of the
latter, and becoming condensed, is carried downwards, and turned
into water once more; just so the excrementitious evaporation, when
carried up by the heat to the region of the brain, is condensed into a
'phlegm' (which explains why catarrhs are seen to proceed from the
head); while that evaporation which is nutrient and not unwholesome,
becoming condensed, descends and cools the hot. The tenuity or
narrowness of the veins about the brain itself contributes to its
being kept cool, and to its not readily admitting the evaporation.
This, then, is a sufficient explanation of the cooling which takes
place, despite the fact that the evaporation is exceedingly hot.

A person awakes from sleep when digestion is completed: when the
heat, which had been previously forced together in large quantity
within a small compass from out the surrounding part, has once more
prevailed, and when a separation has been effected between the more
corporeal and the purer blood. The finest and purest blood is that
contained in the head, while the thickest and most turbid is that in
the lower parts. The source of all the blood is, as has been stated
both here and elsewhere, the heart. Now of the chambers in the heart
the central communicates with each of the two others. Each of the
latter again acts as receiver from each, respectively, of the two
vessels, called the 'great' and the 'aorta'. It is in the central
chamber that the [above-mentioned] separation takes place. To go
into these matters in detail would, however, be more properly the
business of a different treatise from the present. Owing to the fact
that the blood formed after the assimilation of food is especially
in need of separation, sleep [then especially] occurs [and lasts]
until the purest part of this blood has been separated off into the
upper parts of the body, and the most turbid into the lower parts.
When this has taken place animals awake from sleep, being released
from the heaviness consequent on taking food. We have now stated the
cause of sleeping, viz. that it consists in the recoil by the
corporeal element, upborne by the connatural heat, in a mass upon
the primary sense-organ; we have also stated what sleep is, having
shown that it is a seizure of the primary sense-organ, rendering it
unable to actualize its powers; arising of necessity (for it is
impossible for an animal to exist if the conditions which render it an
animal be not fulfilled), i.e. for the sake of its conservation; since
remission of movement tends to the conservation of animals.

-THE END-
.

350 BC

ON YOUTH AND OLD AGE, ON LIFE AND DEATH,

ON BREATHING

by Aristotle

translated by G. R. T. Ross

1

WE must now treat of youth and old age and life and death. We must
probably also at the same time state the causes of respiration as
well, since in some cases living and the reverse depend on this.

We have elsewhere given a precise account of the soul, and while
it is clear that its essential reality cannot be corporeal, yet
manifestly it must exist in some bodily part which must be one of
those possessing control over the members. Let us for the present
set aside the other divisions or faculties of the soul (whichever of
the two be the correct name). But as to being what is called an animal
and a living thing, we find that in all beings endowed with both
characteristics (viz. being an animal and being alive) there must be a
single identical part in virtue of which they live and are called
animals; for an animal qua animal cannot avoid being alive. But a
thing need not, though alive, be animal, for plants live without
having sensation, and it is by sensation that we distinguish animal
from what is not animal.

This organ, then, must be numerically one and the same and yet
possess multiple and disparate aspects, for being animal and living
are not identical. Since then the organs of special sensation have one
common organ in which the senses when functioning must meet, and
this must be situated midway between what is called before and
behind (we call 'before' the direction from which sensation comes,
'behind' the opposite), further, since in all living things the body
is divided into upper and lower (they all have upper and lower
parts, so that this is true of plants as well), clearly the
nutritive principle must be situated midway between these regions.
That part where food enters we call upper, considering it by itself
and not relatively to the surrounding universe, while downward is that
part by which the primary excrement is discharged.

Plants are the reverse of animals in this respect. To man in
particular among the animals, on account of his erect stature, belongs
the characteristic of having his upper parts pointing upwards in the
sense in which that applies to the universe, while in the others these
are in an intermediate position. But in plants, owing to their being
stationary and drawing their sustenance from the ground, the upper
part must always be down; for there is a correspondence between the
roots in a plant and what is called the mouth in animals, by means
of which they take in their food, whether the source of supply be
the earth or each other's bodies.

2

All perfectly formed animals are to be divided into three parts, one
that by which food is taken in, one that by which excrement is
discharged, and the third the region intermediate between them. In the
largest animals this latter is called the chest and in the others
something corresponding; in some also it is more distinctly marked off
than in others. All those also that are capable of progression have
additional members subservient to this purpose, by means of which they
bear the whole trunk, to wit legs and feet and whatever parts are
possessed of the same powers. Now it is evident both by observation
and by inference that the source of the nutritive soul is in the midst
of the three parts. For many animals, when either part-the head or the
receptacle of the food-is cut off, retain life in that member to which
the middle remains attached. This can be seen to occur in many
insects, e.g. wasps and bees, and many animals also besides insects
can, though divided, continue to live by means of the part connected
with nutrition.

While this member is indeed in actuality single, yet potentially
it is multiple, for these animals have a constitution similar to
that of Plants; plants when cut into sections continue to live, and
a number of trees can be derived from one single source. A separate
account will be given of the reason why some plants cannot live when
divided, while others can be propagated by the taking of slips. In
this respect, however, plants and insects are alike.

It is true that the nutritive soul, in beings possessing it, while
actually single must be potentially plural. And it is too with the
principle of sensation, for evidently the divided segments of these
animals have sensation. They are unable, however, to preserve their
constitution, as plants can, not possessing the organs on which the
continuance of life depends, for some lack the means for seizing,
others for receiving their food; or again they may be destitute of
other organs as well.

Divisible animals are like a number of animals grown together, but
animals of superior construction behave differently because their
constitution is a unity of the highest possible kind. Hence some of
the organs on division display slight sensitiveness because they
retain some psychical susceptibility; the animals continue to move
after the vitals have been abstracted: tortoises, for example, do so
even after the heart has been removed.

3

The same phenomenon is evident both in plants and in animals, and in
plants we note it both in their propagation by seed and in grafts
and cuttings. Genesis from seeds always starts from the middle. All
seeds are bivalvular, and the place of junction is situated at the
point of attachment (to the plant), an intermediate part belonging
to both halves. It is from this part that both root and stem of
growing things emerge; the starting-point is in a central position
between them. In the case of grafts and cuttings this is
particularly true of the buds; for the bud is in a way the
starting-point of the branch, but at the same time it is in a
central position. Hence it is either this that is cut off, or into
this that the new shoot is inserted, when we wish either a new
branch or a new root to spring from it; which proves that the point of
origin in growth is intermediate between stem and root.

Likewise in sanguineous animals the heart is the first organ
developed; this is evident from what has been observed in those
cases where observation of their growth is possible. Hence in
bloodless animals also what corresponds to the heart must develop
first. We have already asserted in our treatise on The Parts of
Animals that it is from the heart that the veins issue, and that in
sanguineous animals the blood is the final nutriment from which the
members are formed. Hence it is clear that there is one function in
nutrition which the mouth has the faculty of performing, and a
different one appertaining to the stomach. But it is the heart that
has supreme control, exercising an additional and completing function.
Hence in sanguineous animals the source both of the sensitive and of
the nutritive soul must be in the heart, for the functions relative to
nutrition exercised by the other parts are ancillary to the activity
of the heart. It is the part of the dominating organ to achieve the
final result, as of the physician's efforts to be directed towards
health, and not to be occupied with subordinate offices.

Certainly, however, all saguineous animals have the supreme organ of
the sensefaculties in the heart, for it is here that we must look
for the common sensorium belonging to all the sense-organs. These in
two cases, taste and touch, can be clearly seen to extend to the
heart, and hence the others also must lead to it, for in it the
other organs may possibly initiate changes, whereas with the upper
region of the body taste and touch have no connexion. Apart from these
considerations, if the life is always located in this part,
evidently the principle of sensation must be situated there too, for
it is qua animal that an animal is said to be a living thing, and it
is called animal because endowed with sensation. Elsewhere in other
works we have stated the reasons why some of the sense-organs are,
as is evident, connected with the heart, while others are situated
in the head. (It is this fact that causes some people to think that it
is in virtue of the brain that the function of perception belongs to
animals.)

4

Thus if, on the one hand, we look to the observed facts, what we
have said makes it clear that the source of the sensitive soul,
together with that connected with growth and nutrition, is situated in
this organ and in the central one of the three divisions of the
body. But it follows by deduction also; for we see that in every case,
when several results are open to her, Nature always brings to pass the
best. Now if both principles are located in the midst of the
substance, the two parts of the body, viz. that which elaborates and
that which receives the nutriment in its final form will best
perform their appropriate function; for the soul will then be close to
each, and the central situation which it will, as such, occupy is
the position of a dominating power.

Further, that which employs an instrument and the instrument it
employs must be distinct (and must be spatially diverse too, if
possible, as in capacity), just as the flute and that which plays
it-the hand-are diverse. Thus if animal is defined by the possession
of sensitive soul, this soul must in the sanguineous animals be in the
heart, and, in the bloodless ones, in the corresponding part of
their body. But in animals all the members and the whole body
possess some connate warmth of constitution, and hence when alive they
are observed to be warm, but when dead and deprived of life they are
the opposite. Indeed, the source of this warmth must be in the heart
in sanguineous animals, and in the case of bloodless animals in the
corresponding organ, for, though all parts of the body by means of
their natural heat elaborate and concoct the nutriment, the
governing organ takes the chief share in this process. Hence, though
the other members become cold, life remains; but when the warmth
here is quenched, death always ensues, because the source of heat in
all the other members depends on this, and the soul is, as it were,
set aglow with fire in this part, which in sanguineous animals is
the heart and in the bloodless order the analogous member. Hence, of
necessity, life must be coincident with the maintenance of heat, and
what we call death is its destruction.

5

However, it is to be noticed that there are two ways in which fire
ceases to exist; it may go out either by exhaustion or by
extinction. That which is self-caused we call exhaustion, that due
to its opposites extinction. [The former is that due to old age, the
latter to violence.] But either of these ways in which fire ceases
to be may be brought about by the same cause, for, when there is a
deficiency of nutriment and the warmth can obtain no maintenance,
the fire fails; and the reason is that the opposite, checking
digestion, prevents the fire from being fed. But in other cases the
result is exhaustion,-when the heat accumulates excessively owing to
lack of respiration and of refrigeration. For in this case what
happens is that the heat, accumulating in great quantity, quickly uses
up its nutriment and consumes it all before more is sent up by
evaporation. Hence not only is a smaller fire readily put out by a
large one, but of itself the candle flame is consumed when inserted in
a large blaze just as is the case with any other combustible. The
reason is that the nutriment in the flame is seized by the larger
one before fresh fuel can be added, for fire is ever coming into being
and rushing just like a river, but so speedily as to elude
observation.

Clearly therefore, if the bodily heat must be conserved (as is
necessary if life is to continue), there must be some way of cooling
the heat resident in the source of warmth. Take as an illustration
what occurs when coals are confined in a brazier. If they are kept
covered up continuously by the so-called 'choker', they are quickly
extinguished, but, if the lid is in rapid alternation lifted up and
put on again they remain glowing for a long time. Banking up a fire
also keeps it in, for the ashes, being porous, do not prevent the
passage of air, and again they enable it to resist extinction by the
surrounding air by means of the supply of heat which it possesses.
However, we have stated in The Problems the reasons why these
operations, namely banking up and covering up a fire, have the
opposite effects (in the one case the fire goes out, in the other it
continues alive for a considerable time).

6

Everything living has soul, and it, as we have said, cannot exist
without the presence of heat in the constitution. In plants the
natural heat is sufficiently well kept alive by the aid which their
nutriment and the surrounding air supply. For the food has a cooling
effect [as it enters, just as it has in man] when first it is taken
in, whereas abstinence from food produces heat and thirst. The air, if
it be motionless, becomes hot, but by the entry of food a motion is
set up which lasts until digestion is completed and so cools it. If
the surrounding air is excessively cold owing to the time of year,
there being severe frost, plants shrivel, or if, in the extreme
heats of summer the moisture drawn from the ground cannot produce
its cooling effect, the heat comes to an end by exhaustion. Trees
suffering at such seasons are said to be blighted or star-stricken.
Hence the practice of laying beneath the roots stones of certain
species or water in pots, for the purpose of cooling the roots of
the plants.

Some animals pass their life in the water, others in the air, and
therefore these media furnish the source and means of refrigeration,
water in the one case, air in the other. We must proceed-and it will
require further application on our part-to give an account of the
way and manner in which this refrigeration occurs.

7

A few of the previous physical philosophers have spoken of
respiration. The reason, however, why it exists in animals they have
either not declared or, when they have, their statements are not
correct and show a comparative lack of acquaintance with the facts.
Moreover they assert that all animals respire-which is untrue. Hence
these points must first claim our attention, in order that we may
not be thought to make unsubstantiated charges against authors no
longer alive.

First then, it is evident that all animals with lungs breathe, but
in some cases breathing animals have a bloodless and spongy lung,
and then there is less need for respiration. These animals can
remain under water for a time, which relatively to their bodily
strength, is considerable. All oviparous animals, e.g. the frog-tribe,
have a spongy lung. Also hemydes and tortoises can remain for a long
time immersed in water; for their lung, containing little blood, has
not much heat. Hence, when once it is inflated, it itself, by means of
its motion, produces a cooling effect and enables the animal to remain
immersed for a long time. Suffocation, however, always ensues if the
animal is forced to hold its breath for too long a time, for none of
this class take in water in the way fishes do. On the other hand,
animals which have the lung charged with blood have greater need of
respiration on account of the amount of their heat, while none at
all of the others which do not possess lungs breathe.

8

Democritus of Abdera and certain others who have treated of
respiration, while saying nothing definite about the lungless animals,
nevertheless seem to speak as if all breathed. But Anaxagoras and
Diogenes both maintain that all breathe, and state the manner in which
fishes and oysters respire. Anaxagoras says that when fishes discharge
water through their gills, air is formed in the mouth, for there can
be no vacuum, and that it is by drawing in this that they respire.
Diogenes' statement is that, when they discharge water through their
gills, they suck the air out of the water surrounding the mouth by
means of the vacuum formed in the mouth, for he believes there is
air in the water.

But these theories are untenable. Firstly, they state only what is
the common element in both operations and so leave out the half of the
matter. For what goes by the name of respiration consists, on the
one hand, of inhalation, and, on the other, of the exhalation of
breath; but, about the latter they say nothing, nor do they describe
how such animals emit their breath. Indeed, explanation is for them
impossible for, when the creatures respire, they must discharge
their breath by the same passage as that by which they draw it in, and
this must happen in alternation. Hence, as a result, they must take
the water into their mouth at the same time as they breathe out. But
the air and the water must meet and obstruct each other. Further, when
they discharge the water they must emit their breath by the mouth or
the gills, and the result will be that they will breathe in and
breathe out at the same time, for it is at that moment that
respiration is said to occur. But it is impossible that they should do
both at the same time. Hence, if respiring creatures must both
exhale and inhale the air, and if none of these animals can breathe
out, evidently none can respire at all.

9

Further, the assertion that they draw in air out of the mouth or out
of the water by means of the mouth is an impossibility, for, not
having a lung, they have no windpipe; rather the stomach is closely
juxtaposed to the mouth, so that they must do the sucking with the
stomach. But in that case the other animals would do so also, which is
not the truth; and the water-animals also would be seen to do it
when out of the water, whereas quite evidently they do not. Further,
in all animals that respire and draw breath there is to be observed
a certain motion in the part of the body which draws in the air, but
in the fishes this does not occur. Fishes do not appear to move any of
the parts in the region of the stomach, except the gills alone, and
these move both when they are in the water and when they are thrown on
to dry land and gasp. Moreover, always when respiring animals are
killed by being suffocated in water, bubbles are formed of the air
which is forcibly discharged, as happens, e.g. when one forces a
tortoise or a frog or any other animal of a similar class to stay
beneath water. But with fishes this result never occurs, in whatsoever
way we try to obtain it, since they do not contain air drawn from an
external source. Again, the manner of respiration said to exist in
them might occur in the case of men also when they are under water.
For if fishes draw in air out of the surrounding water by means of
their mouth why should not men too and other animals do so also;
they should also, in the same way as fishes, draw in air out of the
mouth. If in the former case it were possible, so also should it be in
the latter. But, since in the one it is not so, neither does it
occur in the other. Furthermore, why do fishes, if they respire, die
in the air and gasp (as can be seen) as in suffocation? It is not want
of food that produces this effect upon them, and the reason given by
Diogenes is foolish, for he says that in air they take in too much air
and hence die, but in the water they take in a moderate amount. But
that should be a possible occurrence with land animals also; as
facts are, however, no land animal seems to be suffocated by excessive
respiration. Again, if all animals breathe, insects must do so also.
many of them seem to live though divided not merely into two, but into
several parts, e.g. the class called Scolopendra. But how can they,
when thus divided, breathe, and what is the organ they employ? The
main reason why these writers have not given a good account of these
facts is that they have no acquaintance with the internal organs,
and that they did not accept the doctrine that there is a final
cause for whatever Nature does. If they had asked for what purpose
respiration exists in animals, and had considered this with
reference to the organs, e.g. the gills and the lungs, they would have
discovered the reason more speedily.

10

Democritus, however, does teach that in the breathing animals
there is a certain result produced by respiration; he asserts that
it prevents the soul from being extruded from the body.
Nevertheless, he by no means asserts that it is for this purpose
that Nature so contrives it, for he, like the other physical
philosophers, altogether fails to attain to any such explanation.
His statement is that the soul and the hot element are identical,
being the primary forms among the spherical particles. Hence, when
these are being crushed together by the surrounding atmosphere
thrusting them out, respiration, according to his account, comes in to
succour them. For in the air there are many of those particles which
he calls mind and soul. Hence, when we breathe and the air enters,
these enter along with it, and by their action cancel the pressure,
thus preventing the expulsion of the soul which resides in the animal.

This explains why life and death are bound up with the taking in and
letting out of the breath; for death occurs when the compression by
the surrounding air gains the upper hand, and, the animal being unable
to respire, the air from outside can no longer enter and counteract
the compression. Death is the departure of those forms owing to the
expulsive pressure exerted by the surrounding air. Death, however,
occurs not by haphazard but, when natural, owing to old age, and, when
unnatural, to violence.

But the reason for this and why all must die Democritus has by no
means made clear. And yet, since evidently death occurs at one time of
life and not at another, he should have said whether the cause is
external or internal. Neither does he assign the cause of the
beginning of respiration, nor say whether it is internal or
external. Indeed, it is not the case that the external mind
superintends the reinforcement; rather the origin of breathing and
of the respiratory motion must be within: it is not due to pressure
from around. It is absurd also that what surrounds should compress and
at the same time by entering dilate. This then is practically his
theory, and how he puts it.

But if we must consider that our previous account is true, and
that respiration does not occur in every animal, we must deem that
this explains death not universally, but only in respiring animals.
Yet neither is it a good account of these even, as may clearly be seen
from the facts and phenomena of which we all have experience. For in
hot weather we grow warmer, and, having more need of respiration, we
always breathe faster. But, when the air around is cold and
contracts and solidifies the body, retardation of the breathing
results. Yet this was just the time when the external air should enter
and annul the expulsive movement, whereas it is the opposite that
occurs. For when the breath is not let out and the heat accumulates
too much then we need to respire, and to respire we must draw in the
breath. When hot, people breathe rapidly, because they must do so in
order to cool themselves, just when the theory of Democritus would
make them add fire to fire.

11

The theory found in the Timaeus, of the passing round of the
breath by pushing, by no means determines how, in the case of the
animals other than land-animals, their heat is preserved, and
whether it is due to the same or a different cause. For if respiration
occurs only in land-animals we should be told what is the reason of
that. Likewise, if it is found in others also, but in a different
form, this form of respiration, if they all can breathe, must also
be described.

Further, the method of explaining involves a fiction. It is said
that when the hot air issues from the mouth it pushes the
surrounding air, which being carried on enters the very place whence
the internal warmth issued, through the interstices of the porous
flesh; and this reciprocal replacement is due to the fact that a
vacuum cannot exist. But when it has become hot the air passes out
again by the same route, and pushes back inwards through the mouth the
air that had been discharged in a warm condition. It is said that it
is this action which goes on continuously when the breath is taken
in and let out.

But according to this way of thinking it will follow that we breathe
out before we breathe in. But the opposite is the case, as evidence
shows, for though these two functions go on in alternation, yet the
last act when life comes to a close is the letting out of the
breath, and hence its admission must have been the beginning of the
process.

Once more, those who give this kind of explanation by no means state
the final cause of the presence in animals of this function (to wit
the admission and emission of the breath), but treat it as though it
were a contingent accompaniment of life. Yet it evidently has
control over life and death, for it results synchronously that when
respiring animals are unable to breathe they perish. Again, it is
absurd that the passage of the hot air out through the mouth and
back again should be quite perceptible, while we were not able to
detect the thoracic influx and the return outwards once more of the
heated breath. It is also nonsense that respiration should consist
in the entrance of heat, for the evidence is to the contrary effect;
what is breathed out is hot, and what is breathed in is cold. When
it is hot we pant in breathing, for, because what enters does not
adequately perform its cooling function, we have as a consequence to
draw the breath frequently.

12

It is certain, however, that we must not entertain the notion that
it is for purposes of nutrition that respiration is designed, and
believe that the internal fire is fed by the breath; respiration, as
it were, adding fuel to the fire, while the feeding of the flame
results in the outward passage of the breath. To combat this
doctrine I shall repeat what I said in opposition to the previous
theories. This, or something analogous to it, should occur in the
other animals also (on this theory), for all possess vital heat.
Further, how are we to describe this fictitious process of the
generation of heat from the breath? Observation shows rather that it
is a product of the food. A consequence also of this theory is that
the nutriment would enter and the refuse be discharged by the same
channel, but this does not appear to occur in the other instances.

13

Empedocles also gives an account of respiration without, however,
making clear what its purpose is, or whether or not it is universal in
animals. Also when dealing with respiration by means of the nostrils
he imagines he is dealing with what is the primary kind of
respiration. Even the breath which passes through the nostrils
passes through the windpipe out of the chest as well, and without
the latter the nostrils cannot act. Again, when animals are bereft
of respiration through the nostrils, no detrimental result ensues,
but, when prevented from breathing through the windpipe, they die.
Nature employs respiration through the nostrils as a secondary
function in certain animals in order to enable them to smell. But
the reason why it exists in some only is that though almost all
animals are endowed with the sense of smell, the sense-organ is not
the same in all.

A more precise account has been given about this elsewhere.
Empedocles, however, explains the passage inwards and outwards of
the breath, by the theory that there are certain blood-vessels, which,
while containing blood, are not filled by it, but have passages
leading to the outer air, the calibre of which is fine in contrast
to the size of the solid particles, but large relatively to those in
the air. Hence, since it is the nature of the blood to move upwards
and downwards, when it moves down the air rushes in and inspiration
occurs; when the blood rises, the air is forced out and the outward
motion of the breath results. He compares this process to what
occurs in a clepsydra.

Thus all things outwards breathe and in;- their flesh has tubes

Bloodless, that stretch towards the body's outmost edge,

Which, at their mouths, full many frequent channels pierce,

Cleaving the extreme nostrils through; thus, while the gore

Lies hid, for air is cut a thoroughfare most plain.

And thence, whenever shrinks away the tender blood,

Enters the blustering wind with swelling billow wild.

But when the blood leaps up, backward it breathes. As when

With water-clock of polished bronze a maiden sporting,

Sets on her comely hand the narrow of the tube

And dips it in the frail-formed water's silvery sheen;

Not then the flood the vessel enters, but the air,

Until she frees the crowded stream. But then indeed

Upon the escape runs in the water meet.

So also when within the vessel's deeps the water

Remains, the opening by the hand of flesh being closed,

The outer air that entrance craves restrains the flood

At the gates of the sounding narrow,

upon the surface pressing,

Until the maid withdraws her hand. But then in contrariwise

Once more the air comes in and water meet flows out.

Thus to the to the subtle blood, surging throughout the limbs,

Whene'er it shrinks away into the far recesses

Admits a stream of air rushing with swelling wave,

But, when it backward leaps, in like bulk air flows out.

This then is what he says of respiration. But, as we said, all
animals that evidently respire do so by means of the windpipe, when
they breathe either through the mouth or through the nostrils.
Hence, if it is of this kind of respiration that he is talking, we
must ask how it tallies with the explanation given. But the facts seem
to be quite opposed. The chest is raised in the manner of a
forge-bellows when the breath is drawn in-it is quite reasonable
that it should be heat which raises up and that the blood should
occupy the hot region-but it collapses and sinks down, like the
bellows once more, when the breath is let out. The difference is
that in a bellows it is not by the same channel that the air is
taken in and let out, but in breathing it is.

But, if Empedocles is accounting only for respiration through the
nostrils, he is much in error, for that does not involve the
nostrils alone, but passes by the channel beside the uvula where the
extremity of the roof of the mouth is, some of the air going this
way through the apertures of the nostrils and some through the
mouth, both when it enters and when it passes out. Such then is the
nature and magnitude of the difficulties besetting the theories of
other writers concerning
respiration.

14

We have already stated that life and the presence of soul involve
a certain heat. Not even the digesting process to which is due the
nutrition of animals occurs apart from soul and warmth, for it is to
fire that in all cases elaboration is due. It is for this reason,
precisely, that the primary nutritive soul also must be located in
that part of the body and in that division of this region which is the
immediate vehicle of this principle. The region in question is
intermediate between that where food enters and that where excrement
is discharged. In bloodless animals it has no name, but in the
sanguineous class this organ is called the heart. The blood
constitutes the nutriment from which the organs of the animal are
directly formed. Likewise the bloodvessels must have the same
originating source, since the one exists for the other's behoof-as a
vessel or receptacle for it. In sanguineous animals the heart is the
starting-point of the veins; they do not traverse it, but are found to
stretch out from it, as dissections enable us to see.

Now the other psychical faculties cannot exist apart from the
power of nutrition (the reason has already been stated in the treatise
On the Soul), and this depends on the natural fire, by the union
with which Nature has set it aglow. But fire, as we have already
stated, is destroyed in two ways, either by extinction or by
exhaustion. It suffers extinction from its opposites. Hence it can
be extinguished by the surrounding cold both when in mass and
(though more speedily) when scattered. Now this way of perishing is
due to violence equally in living and in lifeless objects, for the
division of an animal by instruments and consequent congelation by
excess of cold cause death. But exhaustion is due to excess of heat;
if there is too much heat close at hand and the thing burning does not
have a fresh supply of fuel added to it, it goes out by exhaustion,
not by the action of cold. Hence, if it is going to continue it must
be cooled, for cold is a preventive against this form of extinction.

15

Some animals occupy the water, others live on land, and, that being
so, in the case of those which are very small and bloodless the
refrigeration due to the surrounding water or air is sufficient to
prevent destruction from this cause. Having little heat, they
require little cold to combat it. Hence too such animals are almost
all short-lived, for, being small, they have less scope for deflection
towards either extreme. But some insects are longer-lived though
bloodless, like all the others), and these have a deep indentation
beneath the waist, in order to secure cooling through the membrane,
which there is thinner. They are warmer animals and hence require more
refrigeration, and such are bees (some of which live as long as
seven years) and all that make a humming noise, like wasps,
cockchafers, and crickets. They make a sound as if of panting by means
of air, for, in the middle section itself, the air which exists
internally and is involved in their construction, causing a rising and
falling movement, produces friction against the membrane. The way in
which they move this region is like the motion due to the lungs in
animals that breathe the outer air, or to the gills in fishes. What
occurs is comparable to the suffocation of a respiring animal by
holding its mouth, for then the lung causes a heaving motion of this
kind. In the case of these animals this internal motion is not
sufficient for refrigeration, but in insects it is. It is by
friction against the membrane that they produce the humming sound,
as we said, in the way that children do by blowing through the holes
of a reed covered by a fine membrane. It is thus that the singing
crickets too produce their song; they possess greater warmth and are
indented at the waist, but the songless variety have no fissure there.

Animals also which are sanguineous and possess a lung, though that
contains little blood and is spongy, can in some cases, owing to the
latter fact, live a long time without breathing; for the lung,
containing little blood or fluid, can rise a long way: its own
motion can for a long time produce sufficient refrigeration. But at
last it ceases to suffice, and the animal dies of suffocation if it
does not respire-as we have already said. For of exhaustion that
kind which is destruction due to lack of refrigeration is called
suffocation, and whatsoever is thus destroyed is said to be
suffocated.

We have already stated that among animals insects do not respire,
and the fact is open to observation in the case of even small
creatures like flies and bees, for they can swim about in a fluid
for a long time if it is not too hot or too cold. Yet animals with
little strength tend to breathe more frequently. These, however, die
of what is called suffocation when the stomach becomes filled and
the heat in the central segment is destroyed. This explains also why
they revive after being among ashes for a time.

Again among water-animals those that are bloodless remain alive
longer in air than those that have blood and admit the sea-water,
as, for example, fishes. Since it is a small quantity of heat they
possess, the air is for a long time adequate for the purposes of
refrigeration in such animals as the crustacea and the polyps. It does
not however suffice, owing to their want of heat, to keep them finally
in life, for most fishes also live though among earth, yet in a
motionless state, and are to be found by digging. For all animals that
have no lung at all or have a bloodless one require less
refrigeration.

16

Concerning the bloodless animals we have declared that in some cases
it is the surrounding air, in others fluid, that aids the
maintenance of life. But in the case of animals possessing blood and
heart, all which have a lung admit the air and produce the cooling
effect by breathing in and out. All animals have a lung that are
viviparous and are so internally, not externally merely (the
Selachia are viviparous, but not internally), and of the oviparous
class those that have wings, e.g. birds, and those with scales, e.g.
tortoises, lizards, and snakes. The former class have a lung charged
with blood, but in the most part of the latter it is spongy. Hence
they employ respiration more sparingly as already said. The function
is found also in all that frequent and pass their life in the water,
e.g. the class of water-snakes and frogs and crocodiles and hemydes,
both sea- and land-tortoises, and seals.

All these and similar animals both bring forth on land and sleep
on shore or, when they do so in the water, keep the head above the
surface in order to respire. But all with gills produce
refrigeration by taking in water; the Selachia and all other
footless animals have gills. Fish are footless, and the limbs they
have get their name (pterugion) from their similarity to wings
(pterux). But of those with feet one only, so far as observed, has
gills. It is called the tadpole.

No animal yet has been seen to possess both lungs and gills, and the
reason for this is that the lung is designed for the purpose of
refrigeration by means of the air (it seems to have derived its name
(pneumon) from its function as a receptacle of the breath (pneuma)),
while gills are relevant to refrigeration by water. Now for one
purpose one organ is adapted and one single means of refrigeration
is sufficient in every case. Hence, since we see that Nature does
nothing in vain, and if there were two organs one would be
purposeless, this is the reason why some animals have gills, others
lungs, but none possess both.

17

Every animal in order to exist requires nutriment, in order to
prevent itself from dying, refrigeration; and so Nature employs the
same organ for both purposes. For, as in some cases the tongue
serves both for discerning tastes and for speech, so in animals with
lungs the mouth is employed both in working up the food and in the
passage of the breath outwards and inwards. In lungless and
non-respiring animals it is employed in working up the food, while
in those of them that require refrigeration it is the gills that are
created for this purpose.

We shall state further on how it is that these organs have the
faculty of producing refrigeration. But to prevent their food from
impeding these operations there is a similar contrivance in the
respiring animals and in those that admit water. At the moment of
respiration they do not take in food, for otherwise suffocation
results owing to the food, whether liquid or dry, slipping in
through the windpipe and lying on the lung. The windpipe is situated
before the oesophagus, through which food passes into what is called
the stomach, but in quadrupeds which are sanguineous there is, as it
were, a lid over the windpipe-the epiglottis. In birds and oviparous
quadrupeds this covering is absent, but its office is discharged by
a contraction of the windpipe. The latter class contract the
windpipe when swallowing their food; the former close down the
epiglottis. When the food has passed, the epiglottis is in the one
case raised, and in the other the windpipe is expanded, and the air
enters to effect refrigeration. In animals with gills the water is
first discharged through them and then the food passes in through
the mouth; they have no windpipe and hence can take no harm from
liquid lodging in this organ, only from its entering the stomach.
For these reasons the expulsion of water and the seizing of their food
is rapid, and their teeth are sharp and in almost all cases arranged
in a saw-like fashion, for they are debarred from chewing their food.

18

Among water-animals the cetaceans may give rise to some
perplexity, though they too can be rationally explained.

Examples of such animals are dolphins and whales, and all others
that have a blowhole. They have no feet, yet possess a lung though
admitting the sea-water. The reason for possessing a lung is that
which we have now stated [refrigeration]; the admission of water is
not for the purpose of refrigeration. That is effected by respiration,
for they have a lung. Hence they sleep with their head out of the
water, and dolphins, at any rate, snore. Further, if they are
entangled in nets they soon die of suffocation owing to lack of
respiration, and hence they can be seen to come to the surface owing
to the necessity of breathing. But, since they have to feed in the
water, they must admit it, and it is in order to discharge this that
they all have a blow-hole; after admitting the water they expel it
through the blow-hole as the fishes do through the gills. The position
of the blow-hole is an indication of this, for it leads to none of the
organs which are charged with blood; but it lies before the brain
and thence discharges water.

It is for the very same reason that molluscs and crustaceans admit
water-I mean such animals as Carabi and Carcini. For none of these
is refrigeration a necessity, for in every case they have little
heat and are bloodless, and hence are sufficiently cooled by the
surrounding water. But in feeding they admit water, and hence must
expel it in order to prevent its being swallowed simultaneously with
the food. Thus crustaceans, like the Carcini and Carabi, discharge
water through the folds beside their shaggy parts, while cuttlefish
and the polyps employ for this purpose the hollow above the head.
There is, however, a more precise account of these in the History of
Animals.

Thus it has been explained that the cause of the admission of the
water is refrigeration, and the fact that animals constituted for a
life in water must feed in it.

19

An account must next be given of refrigeration and the manner in
which it occurs in respiring animals and those possessed of gills.
We have already said that all animals with lungs respire. The reason
why some creatures have this organ, and why those having it need
respiration, is that the higher animals have a greater proportion of
heat, for at the same time they must have been assigned a higher
soul and they have a higher nature than plants. Hence too those with
most blood and most warmth in the lung are of greater size, and animal
in which the blood in the lung is purest and most plentiful is the
most erect, namely man; and the reason why he alone has his upper part
directed to the upper part of the universe is that he possesses such a
lung. Hence this organ as much as any other must be assigned to the
essence of the animal both in man and in other cases.

This then is the purpose of refrigeration. As for the constraining
and efficient cause, we must believe that it created animals like
this, just as it created many others also not of this constitution.
For some have a greater proportion of earth in their composition, like
plants, and others, e.g. aquatic animals, contain a larger amount of
water; while winged and terrestrial animals have an excess of air
and fire respectively. It is always in the region proper to the
element preponderating in the scheme of their constitution that things
exist.

20

Empedocles is then in error when he says that those animals which
have the most warmth and fire live in the water to counterbalance
the excess of heat in their constitution, in order that, since they
are deficient in cold and fluid, they may be kept in life by the
contrary character of the region they occupy; for water has less
heat than air. But it is wholly absurd that the water-animals should
in every case originate on dry land, and afterwards change their place
of abode to the water; for they are almost all footless. He,
however, when describing their original structure says that, though
originating on dry land, they have abandoned it and migrated to the
water. But again it is evident that they are not warmer than
land-animals, for in some cases they have no blood at all, in others
little.

The question, however, as to what sorts of animals should be
called warm and what cold, has in each special case received
consideration. Though in one respect there is reason in the
explanation which Empedocles aims at establishing, yet his account
is not correct. Excess in a bodily state is cured by a situation or
season of opposite character, but the constitution is best
maintained by an environment akin to it. There is a difference between
the material of which any animal is constituted and the states and
dispositions of that material. For example, if nature were to
constitute a thing of wax or of ice, she would not preserve it by
putting it in a hot place, for the opposing quality would quickly
destroy it, seeing that heat dissolves that which cold congeals.
Again, a thing composed of salt or nitre would not be taken and placed
in water, for fluid dissolves that of which the consistency is due
to the hot and the dry.

Hence if the fluid and the dry supply the material for all bodies,
it is reasonable that things the composition of which is due to the
fluid and the cold should have liquid for their medium [and, if they
are cold, they will exist in the cold], while that which is due to the
dry will be found in the dry. Thus trees grow not in water but on
dry land. But the same theory would relegate them to the water, on
account of their excess of dryness, just as it does the things that
are excessively fiery. They would migrate thither not on account of
its cold but owing to its fluidity.

Thus the natural character of the material of objects is of the same
nature as the region in which they exist; the liquid is found in
liquid, the dry on land, the warm in air. With regard, however, to
states of body, a cold situation has, on the other hand, a
beneficial effect on excess of heat, and a warm environment on
excess of cold, for the region reduces to a mean the excess in the
bodily condition. The regions appropriate to each material and the
revolutions of the seasons which all experience supply the means which
must be sought in order to correct such excesses; but, while states of
the body can be opposed in character to the environment, the
material of which it is composed can never be so. This, then, is a
sufficient explanation of why it is not owing to the heat in their
constitution that some animals are aquatic, others terrestrial, as
Empedocles maintains, and of why some possess lungs and others do not.

21

The explanation of the admission of air and respiration in those
animals in which a lung is found, and especially in those in which
it is full of blood, is to be found in the fact that it is of a spongy
nature and full of tubes, and that it is the most fully charged with
blood of all the visceral organs. All animals with a full-blooded lung
require rapid refrigeration because there is little scope for
deviation from the normal amount of their vital fire; the air also
must penetrate all through it on account of the large quantity of
blood and heat it contains. But both these operations can be easily
performed by air, for, being of a subtle nature, it penetrates
everywhere and that rapidly, and so performs its cooling function; but
water has the opposite characteristics.

The reason why animals with a full-blooded lung respire most is
hence manifest; the more heat there is, the greater is the need for
refrigeration, and at the same time breath can easily pass to the
source of heat in the heart.

22

In order to understand the way in which the heart is connected
with the lung by means of passages, we must consult both dissections
and the account in the History of Animals. The universal cause of
the need which the animal has for refrigeration, is the union of the
soul with fire that takes place in the heart. Respiration is the means
of effecting refrigeration, of which those animals make use that
possess a lung as well as a heart. But when they, as for example the
fishes, which on account of their aquatic nature have no lung, possess
the latter organ without the former, the cooling is effected through
the gills by means of water. For ocular evidence as to how the heart
is situated relatively to the gills we must employ dissections, and
for precise details we must refer to Natural History. As a summarizing
statement, however, and for present purposes, the following is the
account of the matter.

It might appear that the heart has not the same position in
terrestrial animals and fishes, but the position really is
identical, for the apex of the heart is in the direction in which they
incline their heads. But it is towards the mouth in fishes that the
apex of the heart points, seeing that they do not incline their
heads in the same direction as land-animals do. Now from the extremity
of the heart a tube of a sinewy, arterial character runs to the centre
where the gills all join. This then is the largest of those ducts, but
on either side of the heart others also issue and run to the extremity
of each gill, and by means of the ceaseless flow of water through
the gills, effect the cooling which passes to the heart.

In similar fashion as the fish move their gills, respiring animals
with rapid action raise and let fall the chest according as the breath
is admitted or expelled. If air is limited in amount and unchanged
they are suffocated, for either medium, owing to contact with the
blood, rapidly becomes hot. The heat of the blood counteracts the
refrigeration and, when respiring animals can no longer move the
lung aquatic animals their gills, whether owing to discase or old age,
their death ensues.

23

To be born and to die are common to all animals, but there are
specifically diverse ways in which these phenomena occur; of
destruction there are different types, though yet something is
common to them all. There is violent death and again natural death,
and the former occurs when the cause of death is external, the
latter when it is internal, and involved from the beginning in the
constitution of the organ, and not an affection derived from a foreign
source. In the case of plants the name given to this is withering,
in animals senility. Death and decay pertain to all things that are
not imperfectly developed; to the imperfect also they may be
ascribed in nearly the same but not an identical sense. Under the
imperfect I class eggs and seeds of plants as they are before the root
appears.

It is always to some lack of heat that death is due, and in
perfect creatures the cause is its failure in the organ containing the
source of the creature's essential nature. This member is situate,
as has been said, at the junction of the upper and lower parts; in
plants it is intermediate between the root and the stem, in
sanguineous animals it is the heart, and in those that are bloodless
the corresponding part of their body. But some of these animals have
potentially many sources of life, though in actuality they possess
only one. This is why some insects live when divided, and why, even
among sanguineous animals, all whose vitality is not intense live
for a long time after the heart has been removed. Tortoises, for
example, do so and make movements with their feet, so long as the
shell is left, a fact to be explained by the natural inferiority of
their constitution, as it is in insects also.

The source of life is lost to its possessors when the heat with
which it is bound up is no longer tempered by cooling, for, as I
have often remarked, it is consumed by itself. Hence when, owing to
lapse of time, the lung in the one class and the gills in the other
get dried up, these organs become hard and earthy and incapable of
movement, and cannot be expanded or contracted. Finally things come to
a climax, and the fire goes out from exhaustion.

Hence a small disturbance will speedily cause death in old age.
Little heat remains, for the most of it has been breathed away in
the long period of life preceding, and hence any increase of strain on
the organ quickly causes extinction. It is just as though the heart
contained a tiny feeble flame which the slightest movement puts out.
Hence in old age death is painless, for no violent disturbance is
required to cause death, and there is an entire absence of feeling
when the soul's connexion is severed. All diseases which harden the
lung by forming tumours or waste residues, or by excess of morbid
heat, as happens in fevers, accelerate the breathing owing to the
inability of the lung to move far either upwards or downwards.
Finally, when motion is no longer possible, the breath is given out
and death ensues.

24

Generation is the initial participation, mediated by warm substance,
in the nutritive soul, and life is the maintenance of this
participation. Youth is the period of the growth of the primary
organ of refrigeration, old age of its decay, while the intervening
time is the prime of life.

A violent death or dissolution consists in the extinction or
exhaustion of the vital heat (for either of these may cause
dissolution), while natural death is the exhaustion of the heat
owing to lapse of time, and occurring at the end of life. In plants
this is to wither, in animals to die. Death, in old age, is the
exhaustion due to inability on the part of the organ, owing to old
age, to produce refrigeration. This then is our account of
generation and life and death, and the reason for their occurrence
in animals.

25

It is hence also clear why respiring animals are suffocated in water
and fishes in air. For it is by water in the latter class, by air in
the former that refrigeration is effected, and either of these means
of performing the function is removed by a change of environment.

There is also to be explained in either case the cause of the
cause of the motion of the gills and of the lungs, the rise and fall
of which effects the admission and expulsion of the breath or of
water. The following, moreover, is the manner of the constitution of
the organ.

26

In connexion with the heart there are three phenomena, which, though
apparently of the same nature, are really not so, namely
palpitation, pulsation, and respiration.

Palpitation is the rushing together of the hot substance in the
heart owing to the chilling influence of residual or waste products.
It occurs, for example, in the ailment known as 'spasms' and in
other diseases. It occurs also in fear, for when one is afraid the
upper parts become cold, and the hot substance, fleeing away, by its
concentration in the heart produces palpitation. It is crushed into so
small a space that sometimes life is extinguished, and the animals die
of the fright and morbid disturbance.

The beating of the heart, which, as can be seen, goes on
continuously, is similar to the throbbing of an abscess. That,
however, is accompanied by pain, because the change produced in the
blood is unnatural, and it goes on until the matter formed by
concoction is discharged. There is a similarity between this
phenomenon and that of boiling; for boiling is due to the
volatilization of fluid by heat and the expansion consequent on
increase of bulk. But in an abscess, if there is no evaporation
through the walls, the process terminates in suppuration due to the
thickening of the liquid, while in boiling it ends in the escape of
the fluid out of the containing vessel.

In the heart the beating is produced by the heat expanding the
fluid, of which the food furnishes a constant supply. It occurs when
the fluid rises to the outer wall of the heart, and it goes on
continuously; for there is a constant flow of the fluid that goes to
constitute the blood, it being in the heart that the blood receives
its primary elaboration. That this is so we can perceive in the
initial stages of generation, for the heart can be seen to contain
blood before the veins become distinct. This explains why pulsation in
youth exceeds that in older people, for in the young the formation
of vapour is more abundant.

All the veins pulse, and do so simultaneously with each other, owing
to their connexion with the heart. The heart always beats, and hence
they also beat continuously and simultaneously with each other and
with it.

Palpitation, then, is the recoil of the heart against the
compression due to cold; and pulsation is the volatilization of the
heated fluid.

27

Respiration takes place when the hot substance which is the seat
of the nutritive principle increases. For it, like the rest of the
body, requires nutrition, and more so than the members, for it is
through it that they are nourished. But when it increases it
necessarily causes the organ to rise. This organ we must to be
constructed like the bellows in a smithy, for both heart and lungs
conform pretty well to this shape. Such a structure must be double,
for the nutritive principle must be situated in the centre of the
natural force.

Thus on increase of bulk expansion results, which necessarily causes
the surrounding parts to rise. Now this can be seen to occur when
people respire; they raise their chest because the motive principle of
the organ described resident within the chest causes an identical
expansion of this organ. When it dilates the outer air must rush in as
into a bellows, and, being cold, by its chilling influence reduces
by extinction the excess of the fire. But, as the increase of bulk
causes the organ to dilate, so diminution causes contraction, and when
it collapses the air which entered must pass out again. When it enters
the air is cold, but on issuing it is warm owing to its contact with
the heat resident in this organ, and this is specially the case in
those animals that possess a full-blooded lung. The numerous
canal-like ducts in the lung, into which it passes, have each a
blood-vessel lying alongside, so that the whole lung is thought to
be full of blood. The inward passage of the air is called respiration,
the outward expiration, and this double movement goes on
continuously just so long as the animal lives and keeps this organ
in continuous motion; it is for this reason that life is bound up with
the passage of the breath outwards and inwards.

It is in the same way that the motion of the gills in fishes takes
place. When the hot substance in the blood throughout the members
rises, the gills rise too, and let the water pass through, but when it
is chilled and retreats through its channels to the heart, they
contract and eject the water. Continually as the heat in the heart
rises, continually on being chilled it returns thither again. Hence,
as in respiring animals life and death are bound up with
respiration, so in the other animals class they depend on the
admission of water.

Our discussion of life and death and kindred topics is now
practically complete. But health and discase also claim the
attention of the scientist, and not mercly of the physician, in so far
as an account of their causes is concerned. The extent to which
these two differ and investigate diverse provinces must not escape us,
since facts show that their inquiries are, to a certain extent, at
least conterminous. For physicians of culture and refinement make some
mention of natural science, and claim to derive their principles
from it, while the most accomplished investigators into nature
generally push their studies so far as to conclude with an account
of medical principles.

-THE END-
.

350 BC

CATEGORIES

by Aristotle

translated by E. M. Edghill

1

Things are said to be named 'equivocally' when, though they have a
common name, the definition corresponding with the name differs for
each. Thus, a real man and a figure in a picture can both lay claim to
the name 'animal'; yet these are equivocally so named, for, though
they have a common name, the definition corresponding with the name
differs for each. For should any one define in what sense each is an
animal, his definition in the one case will be appropriate to that
case only.

On the other hand, things are said to be named 'univocally' which
have both the name and the definition answering to the name in common.
A man and an ox are both 'animal', and these are univocally so
named, inasmuch as not only the name, but also the definition, is
the same in both cases: for if a man should state in what sense each
is an animal, the statement in the one case would be identical with
that in the other.

Things are said to be named 'derivatively', which derive their
name from some other name, but differ from it in termination. Thus the
grammarian derives his name from the word 'grammar', and the
courageous man from the word 'courage'.

2

Forms of speech are either simple or composite. Examples of the
latter are such expressions as 'the man runs', 'the man wins'; of the
former 'man', 'ox', 'runs', 'wins'.

Of things themselves some are predicable of a subject, and are never
present in a subject. Thus 'man' is predicable of the individual
man, and is never present in a subject.

By being 'present in a subject' I do not mean present as parts are
present in a whole, but being incapable of existence apart from the
said subject.

Some things, again, are present in a subject, but are never
predicable of a subject. For instance, a certain point of
grammatical knowledge is present in the mind, but is not predicable of
any subject; or again, a certain whiteness may be present in the
body (for colour requires a material basis), yet it is never
predicable of anything.

Other things, again, are both predicable of a subject and present in
a subject. Thus while knowledge is present in the human mind, it is
predicable of grammar.

There is, lastly, a class of things which are neither present in a
subject nor predicable of a subject, such as the individual man or the
individual horse. But, to speak more generally, that which is
individual and has the character of a unit is never predicable of a
subject. Yet in some cases there is nothing to prevent such being
present in a subject. Thus a certain point of grammatical knowledge is
present in a subject.

3

When one thing is predicated of another, all that which is
predicable of the predicate will be predicable also of the subject.
Thus, 'man' is predicated of the individual man; but 'animal' is
predicated of 'man'; it will, therefore, be predicable of the
individual man also: for the individual man is both 'man' and
'animal'.

If genera are different and co-ordinate, their differentiae are
themselves different in kind. Take as an instance the genus 'animal'
and the genus 'knowledge'. 'With feet', 'two-footed', 'winged',
'aquatic', are differentiae of 'animal'; the species of knowledge
are not distinguished by the same differentiae. One species of
knowledge does not differ from another in being 'two-footed'.

But where one genus is subordinate to another, there is nothing to
prevent their having the same differentiae: for the greater class is
predicated of the lesser, so that all the differentiae of the
predicate will be differentiae also of the subject.

4

Expressions which are in no way composite signify substance,
quantity, quality, relation, place, time, position, state, action,
or affection. To sketch my meaning roughly, examples of substance
are 'man' or 'the horse', of quantity, such terms as 'two cubits long'
or 'three cubits long', of quality, such attributes as 'white',
'grammatical'. 'Double', 'half', 'greater', fall under the category of
relation; 'in a the market place', 'in the Lyceum', under that of
place; 'yesterday', 'last year', under that of time. 'Lying',
'sitting', are terms indicating position, 'shod', 'armed', state;
'to lance', 'to cauterize', action; 'to be lanced', 'to be
cauterized', affection.

No one of these terms, in and by itself, involves an affirmation; it
is by the combination of such terms that positive or negative
statements arise. For every assertion must, as is admitted, be
either true or false, whereas expressions which are not in any way
composite such as 'man', 'white', 'runs', 'wins', cannot be either
true or false.

5

Substance, in the truest and primary and most definite sense of
the word, is that which is neither predicable of a subject nor present
in a subject; for instance, the individual man or horse. But in a
secondary sense those things are called substances within which, as
species, the primary substances are included; also those which, as
genera, include the species. For instance, the individual man is
included in the species 'man', and the genus to which the species
belongs is 'animal'; these, therefore-that is to say, the species
'man' and the genus 'animal,-are termed secondary substances.

It is plain from what has been said that both the name and the
definition of the predicate must be predicable of the subject. For
instance, 'man' is predicted of the individual man. Now in this case
the name of the species man' is applied to the individual, for we
use the term 'man' in describing the individual; and the definition of
'man' will also be predicated of the individual man, for the
individual man is both man and animal. Thus, both the name and the
definition of the species are predicable of the individual.

With regard, on the other hand, to those things which are present in
a subject, it is generally the case that neither their name nor
their definition is predicable of that in which they are present.
Though, however, the definition is never predicable, there is
nothing in certain cases to prevent the name being used. For instance,
'white' being present in a body is predicated of that in which it is
present, for a body is called white: the definition, however, of the
colour white' is never predicable of the body.

Everything except primary substances is either predicable of a
primary substance or present in a primary substance. This becomes
evident by reference to particular instances which occur. 'Animal'
is predicated of the species 'man', therefore of the individual man,
for if there were no individual man of whom it could be predicated, it
could not be predicated of the species 'man' at all. Again, colour
is present in body, therefore in individual bodies, for if there
were no individual body in which it was present, it could not be
present in body at all. Thus everything except primary substances is
either predicated of primary substances, or is present in them, and if
these last did not exist, it would be impossible for anything else
to exist.

Of secondary substances, the species is more truly substance than
the genus, being more nearly related to primary substance. For if
any one should render an account of what a primary substance is, he
would render a more instructive account, and one more proper to the
subject, by stating the species than by stating the genus. Thus, he
would give a more instructive account of an individual man by
stating that he was man than by stating that he was animal, for the
former description is peculiar to the individual in a greater
degree, while the latter is too general. Again, the man who gives an
account of the nature of an individual tree will give a more
instructive account by mentioning the species 'tree' than by
mentioning the genus 'plant'.

Moreover, primary substances are most properly called substances
in virtue of the fact that they are the entities which underlie every.
else, and that everything else is either predicated of them or present
in them. Now the same relation which subsists between primary
substance and everything else subsists also between the species and
the genus: for the species is to the genus as subject is to predicate,
since the genus is predicated of the species, whereas the species
cannot be predicated of the genus. Thus we have a second ground for
asserting that the species is more truly substance than the genus.

Of species themselves, except in the case of such as are genera,
no one is more truly substance than another. We should not give a more
appropriate account of the individual man by stating the species to
which he belonged, than we should of an individual horse by adopting
the same method of definition. In the same way, of primary substances,
no one is more truly substance than another; an individual man is
not more truly substance than an individual ox.

It is, then, with good reason that of all that remains, when we
exclude primary substances, we concede to species and genera alone the
name 'secondary substance', for these alone of all the predicates
convey a knowledge of primary substance. For it is by stating the
species or the genus that we appropriately define any individual
man; and we shall make our definition more exact by stating the former
than by stating the latter. All other things that we state, such as
that he is white, that he runs, and so on, are irrelevant to the
definition. Thus it is just that these alone, apart from primary
substances, should be called substances.

Further, primary substances are most properly so called, because
they underlie and are the subjects of everything else. Now the same
relation that subsists between primary substance and everything else
subsists also between the species and the genus to which the primary
substance belongs, on the one hand, and every attribute which is not
included within these, on the other. For these are the subjects of all
such. If we call an individual man 'skilled in grammar', the predicate
is applicable also to the species and to the genus to which he
belongs. This law holds good in all cases.

It is a common characteristic of all sub. stance that it is never
present in a subject. For primary substance is neither present in a
subject nor predicated of a subject; while, with regard to secondary
substances, it is clear from the following arguments (apart from
others) that they are not present in a subject. For 'man' is
predicated of the individual man, but is not present in any subject:
for manhood is not present in the individual man. In the same way,
'animal' is also predicated of the individual man, but is not
present in him. Again, when a thing is present in a subject, though
the name may quite well be applied to that in which it is present, the
definition cannot be applied. Yet of secondary substances, not only
the name, but also the definition, applies to the subject: we should
use both the definition of the species and that of the genus with
reference to the individual man. Thus substance cannot be present in a
subject.

Yet this is not peculiar to substance, for it is also the case
that differentiae cannot be present in subjects. The characteristics
'terrestrial' and 'two-footed' are predicated of the species 'man',
but not present in it. For they are not in man. Moreover, the
definition of the differentia may be predicated of that of which the
differentia itself is predicated. For instance, if the
characteristic 'terrestrial' is predicated of the species 'man', the
definition also of that characteristic may be used to form the
predicate of the species 'man': for 'man' is terrestrial.

The fact that the parts of substances appear to be present in the
whole, as in a subject, should not make us apprehensive lest we should
have to admit that such parts are not substances: for in explaining
the phrase 'being present in a subject', we stated' that we meant
'otherwise than as parts in a whole'.

It is the mark of substances and of differentiae that, in all
propositions of which they form the predicate, they are predicated
univocally. For all such propositions have for their subject either
the individual or the species. It is true that, inasmuch as primary
substance is not predicable of anything, it can never form the
predicate of any proposition. But of secondary substances, the species
is predicated of the individual, the genus both of the species and
of the individual. Similarly the differentiae are predicated of the
species and of the individuals. Moreover, the definition of the
species and that of the genus are applicable to the primary substance,
and that of the genus to the species. For all that is predicated of
the predicate will be predicated also of the subject. Similarly, the
definition of the differentiae will be applicable to the species and
to the individuals. But it was stated above that the word 'univocal'
was applied to those things which had both name and definition in
common. It is, therefore, established that in every proposition, of
which either substance or a differentia forms the predicate, these are
predicated univocally.

All substance appears to signify that which is individual. In the
case of primary substance this is indisputably true, for the thing
is a unit. In the case of secondary substances, when we speak, for
instance, of 'man' or 'animal', our form of speech gives the
impression that we are here also indicating that which is
individual, but the impression is not strictly true; for a secondary
substance is not an individual, but a class with a certain
qualification; for it is not one and single as a primary substance is;
the words 'man', 'animal', are predicable of more than one subject.

Yet species and genus do not merely indicate quality, like the
term 'white'; 'white' indicates quality and nothing further, but
species and genus determine the quality with reference to a substance:
they signify substance qualitatively differentiated. The determinate
qualification covers a larger field in the case of the genus that in
that of the species: he who uses the word 'animal' is herein using a
word of wider extension than he who uses the word 'man'.

Another mark of substance is that it has no contrary. What could
be the contrary of any primary substance, such as the individual man
or animal? It has none. Nor can the species or the genus have a
contrary. Yet this characteristic is not peculiar to substance, but is
true of many other things, such as quantity. There is nothing that
forms the contrary of 'two cubits long' or of 'three cubits long',
or of 'ten', or of any such term. A man may contend that 'much' is the
contrary of 'little', or 'great' of 'small', but of definite
quantitative terms no contrary exists.

Substance, again, does not appear to admit of variation of degree. I
do not mean by this that one substance cannot be more or less truly
substance than another, for it has already been stated' that this is
the case; but that no single substance admits of varying degrees
within itself. For instance, one particular substance, 'man', cannot
be more or less man either than himself at some other time or than
some other man. One man cannot be more man than another, as that which
is white may be more or less white than some other white object, or as
that which is beautiful may be more or less beautiful than some
other beautiful object. The same quality, moreover, is said to subsist
in a thing in varying degrees at different times. A body, being white,
is said to be whiter at one time than it was before, or, being warm,
is said to be warmer or less warm than at some other time. But
substance is not said to be more or less that which it is: a man is
not more truly a man at one time than he was before, nor is
anything, if it is substance, more or less what it is. Substance,
then, does not admit of variation of degree.

The most distinctive mark of substance appears to be that, while
remaining numerically one and the same, it is capable of admitting
contrary qualities. From among things other than substance, we
should find ourselves unable to bring forward any which possessed this
mark. Thus, one and the same colour cannot be white and black. Nor can
the same one action be good and bad: this law holds good with
everything that is not substance. But one and the selfsame
substance, while retaining its identity, is yet capable of admitting
contrary qualities. The same individual person is at one time white,
at another black, at one time warm, at another cold, at one time good,
at another bad. This capacity is found nowhere else, though it might
be maintained that a statement or opinion was an exception to the
rule. The same statement, it is agreed, can be both true and false.
For if the statement 'he is sitting' is true, yet, when the person
in question has risen, the same statement will be false. The same
applies to opinions. For if any one thinks truly that a person is
sitting, yet, when that person has risen, this same opinion, if
still held, will be false. Yet although this exception may be allowed,
there is, nevertheless, a difference in the manner in which the
thing takes place. It is by themselves changing that substances
admit contrary qualities. It is thus that that which was hot becomes
cold, for it has entered into a different state. Similarly that
which was white becomes black, and that which was bad good, by a
process of change; and in the same way in all other cases it is by
changing that substances are capable of admitting contrary
qualities. But statements and opinions themselves remain unaltered
in all respects: it is by the alteration in the facts of the case that
the contrary quality comes to be theirs. The statement 'he is sitting'
remains unaltered, but it is at one time true, at another false,
according to circumstances. What has been said of statements applies
also to opinions. Thus, in respect of the manner in which the thing
takes place, it is the peculiar mark of substance that it should be
capable of admitting contrary qualities; for it is by itself
changing that it does so.

If, then, a man should make this exception and contend that
statements and opinions are capable of admitting contrary qualities,
his contention is unsound. For statements and opinions are said to
have this capacity, not because they themselves undergo
modification, but because this modification occurs in the case of
something else. The truth or falsity of a statement depends on
facts, and not on any power on the part of the statement itself of
admitting contrary qualities. In short, there is nothing which can
alter the nature of statements and opinions. As, then, no change takes
place in themselves, these cannot be said to be capable of admitting
contrary qualities.

But it is by reason of the modification which takes place within the
substance itself that a substance is said to be capable of admitting
contrary qualities; for a substance admits within itself either
disease or health, whiteness or blackness. It is in this sense that it
is said to be capable of admitting contrary qualities.

To sum up, it is a distinctive mark of substance, that, while
remaining numerically one and the same, it is capable of admitting
contrary qualities, the modification taking place through a change
in the substance itself.

Let these remarks suffice on the subject of substance.

6

Quantity is either discrete or continuous. Moreover, some quantities
are such that each part of the whole has a relative position to the
other parts: others have within them no such relation of part to part.

Instances of discrete quantities are number and speech; of
continuous, lines, surfaces, solids, and, besides these, time and
place.

In the case of the parts of a number, there is no common boundary at
which they join. For example: two fives make ten, but the two fives
have no common boundary, but are separate; the parts three and seven
also do not join at any boundary. Nor, to generalize, would it ever be
possible in the case of number that there should be a common
boundary among the parts; they are always separate. Number, therefore,
is a discrete quantity.

The same is true of speech. That speech is a quantity is evident:
for it is measured in long and short syllables. I mean here that
speech which is vocal. Moreover, it is a discrete quantity for its
parts have no common boundary. There is no common boundary at which
the syllables join, but each is separate and distinct from the rest.

A line, on the other hand, is a continuous quantity, for it is
possible to find a common boundary at which its parts join. In the
case of the line, this common boundary is the point; in the case of
the plane, it is the line: for the parts of the plane have also a
common boundary. Similarly you can find a common boundary in the
case of the parts of a solid, namely either a line or a plane.

Space and time also belong to this class of quantities. Time,
past, present, and future, forms a continuous whole. Space,
likewise, is a continuous quantity; for the parts of a solid occupy
a certain space, and these have a common boundary; it follows that the
parts of space also, which are occupied by the parts of the solid,
have the same common boundary as the parts of the solid. Thus, not
only time, but space also, is a continuous quantity, for its parts
have a common boundary.

Quantities consist either of parts which bear a relative position
each to each, or of parts which do not. The parts of a line bear a
relative position to each other, for each lies somewhere, and it would
be possible to distinguish each, and to state the position of each
on the plane and to explain to what sort of part among the rest each
was contiguous. Similarly the parts of a plane have position, for it
could similarly be stated what was the position of each and what
sort of parts were contiguous. The same is true with regard to the
solid and to space. But it would be impossible to show that the arts
of a number had a relative position each to each, or a particular
position, or to state what parts were contiguous. Nor could this be
done in the case of time, for none of the parts of time has an abiding
existence, and that which does not abide can hardly have position.
It would be better to say that such parts had a relative order, in
virtue of one being prior to another. Similarly with number: in
counting, 'one' is prior to 'two', and 'two' to 'three', and thus
the parts of number may be said to possess a relative order, though it
would be impossible to discover any distinct position for each. This
holds good also in the case of speech. None of its parts has an
abiding existence: when once a syllable is pronounced, it is not
possible to retain it, so that, naturally, as the parts do not
abide, they cannot have position. Thus, some quantities consist of
parts which have position, and some of those which have not.

Strictly speaking, only the things which I have mentioned belong
to the category of quantity: everything else that is called
quantitative is a quantity in a secondary sense. It is because we have
in mind some one of these quantities, properly so called, that we
apply quantitative terms to other things. We speak of what is white as
large, because the surface over which the white extends is large; we
speak of an action or a process as lengthy, because the time covered
is long; these things cannot in their own right claim the quantitative
epithet. For instance, should any one explain how long an action
was, his statement would be made in terms of the time taken, to the
effect that it lasted a year, or something of that sort. In the same
way, he would explain the size of a white object in terms of
surface, for he would state the area which it covered. Thus the things
already mentioned, and these alone, are in their intrinsic nature
quantities; nothing else can claim the name in its own right, but,
if at all, only in a secondary sense.

Quantities have no contraries. In the case of definite quantities
this is obvious; thus, there is nothing that is the contrary of 'two
cubits long' or of 'three cubits long', or of a surface, or of any
such quantities. A man might, indeed, argue that 'much' was the
contrary of 'little', and 'great' of 'small'. But these are not
quantitative, but relative; things are not great or small
absolutely, they are so called rather as the result of an act of
comparison. For instance, a mountain is called small, a grain large,
in virtue of the fact that the latter is greater than others of its
kind, the former less. Thus there is a reference here to an external
standard, for if the terms 'great' and 'small' were used absolutely, a
mountain would never be called small or a grain large. Again, we say
that there are many people in a village, and few in Athens, although
those in the city are many times as numerous as those in the
village: or we say that a house has many in it, and a theatre few,
though those in the theatre far outnumber those in the house. The
terms 'two cubits long, "three cubits long,' and so on indicate
quantity, the terms 'great' and 'small' indicate relation, for they
have reference to an external standard. It is, therefore, plain that
these are to be classed as relative.

Again, whether we define them as quantitative or not, they have no
contraries: for how can there be a contrary of an attribute which is
not to be apprehended in or by itself, but only by reference to
something external? Again, if 'great' and 'small' are contraries, it
will come about that the same subject can admit contrary qualities
at one and the same time, and that things will themselves be
contrary to themselves. For it happens at times that the same thing is
both small and great. For the same thing may be small in comparison
with one thing, and great in comparison with another, so that the same
thing comes to be both small and great at one and the same time, and
is of such a nature as to admit contrary qualities at one and the same
moment. Yet it was agreed, when substance was being discussed, that
nothing admits contrary qualities at one and the same moment. For
though substance is capable of admitting contrary qualities, yet no
one is at the same time both sick and healthy, nothing is at the
same time both white and black. Nor is there anything which is
qualified in contrary ways at one and the same time.

Moreover, if these were contraries, they would themselves be
contrary to themselves. For if 'great' is the contrary of 'small', and
the same thing is both great and small at the same time, then
'small' or 'great' is the contrary of itself. But this is
impossible. The term 'great', therefore, is not the contrary of the
term 'small', nor 'much' of 'little'. And even though a man should
call these terms not relative but quantitative, they would not have
contraries.

It is in the case of space that quantity most plausibly appears to
admit of a contrary. For men define the term 'above' as the contrary
of 'below', when it is the region at the centre they mean by
'below'; and this is so, because nothing is farther from the
extremities of the universe than the region at the centre. Indeed,
it seems that in defining contraries of every kind men have recourse
to a spatial metaphor, for they say that those things are contraries
which, within the same class, are separated by the greatest possible
distance.

Quantity does not, it appears, admit of variation of degree. One
thing cannot be two cubits long in a greater degree than another.
Similarly with regard to number: what is 'three' is not more truly
three than what is 'five' is five; nor is one set of three more
truly three than another set. Again, one period of time is not said to
be more truly time than another. Nor is there any other kind of
quantity, of all that have been mentioned, with regard to which
variation of degree can be predicated. The category of quantity,
therefore, does not admit of variation of degree.

The most distinctive mark of quantity is that equality and
inequality are predicated of it. Each of the aforesaid quantities is
said to be equal or unequal. For instance, one solid is said to be
equal or unequal to another; number, too, and time can have these
terms applied to them, indeed can all those kinds of quantity that
have been mentioned.

That which is not a quantity can by no means, it would seem, be
termed equal or unequal to anything else. One particular disposition
or one particular quality, such as whiteness, is by no means
compared with another in terms of equality and inequality but rather
in terms of similarity. Thus it is the distinctive mark of quantity
that it can be called equal and unequal.

7

Those things are called relative, which, being either said to be
of something else or related to something else, are explained by
reference to that other thing. For instance, the word 'superior' is
explained by reference to something else, for it is superiority over
something else that is meant. Similarly, the expression 'double' has
this external reference, for it is the double of something else that
is meant. So it is with everything else of this kind. There are,
moreover, other relatives, e.g. habit, disposition, perception,
knowledge, and attitude. The significance of all these is explained by
a reference to something else and in no other way. Thus, a habit is
a habit of something, knowledge is knowledge of something, attitude is
the attitude of something. So it is with all other relatives that have
been mentioned. Those terms, then, are called relative, the nature
of which is explained by reference to something else, the
preposition 'of' or some other preposition being used to indicate
the relation. Thus, one mountain is called great in comparison with
son with another; for the mountain claims this attribute by comparison
with something. Again, that which is called similar must be similar to
something else, and all other such attributes have this external
reference. It is to be noted that lying and standing and sitting are
particular attitudes, but attitude is itself a relative term. To
lie, to stand, to be seated, are not themselves attitudes, but take
their name from the aforesaid attitudes.

It is possible for relatives to have contraries. Thus virtue has a
contrary, vice, these both being relatives; knowledge, too, has a
contrary, ignorance. But this is not the mark of all relatives;
'double' and 'triple' have no contrary, nor indeed has any such term.

It also appears that relatives can admit of variation of degree. For
'like' and 'unlike', 'equal' and 'unequal', have the modifications
'more' and 'less' applied to them, and each of these is relative in
character: for the terms 'like' and 'unequal' bear 'unequal' bear a
reference to something external. Yet, again, it is not every
relative term that admits of variation of degree. No term such as
'double' admits of this modification. All relatives have correlatives:
by the term 'slave' we mean the slave of a master, by the term
'master', the master of a slave; by 'double', the double of its
hall; by 'half', the half of its double; by 'greater', greater than
that which is less; by 'less,' less than that which is greater.

So it is with every other relative term; but the case we use to
express the correlation differs in some instances. Thus, by
knowledge we mean knowledge the knowable; by the knowable, that
which is to be apprehended by knowledge; by perception, perception
of the perceptible; by the perceptible, that which is apprehended by
perception.

Sometimes, however, reciprocity of correlation does not appear to
exist. This comes about when a blunder is made, and that to which
the relative is related is not accurately stated. If a man states that
a wing is necessarily relative to a bird, the connexion between
these two will not be reciprocal, for it will not be possible to say
that a bird is a bird by reason of its wings. The reason is that the
original statement was inaccurate, for the wing is not said to be
relative to the bird qua bird, since many creatures besides birds have
wings, but qua winged creature. If, then, the statement is made
accurate, the connexion will be reciprocal, for we can speak of a
wing, having reference necessarily to a winged creature, and of a
winged creature as being such because of its wings.

Occasionally, perhaps, it is necessary to coin words, if no word
exists by which a correlation can adequately be explained. If we
define a rudder as necessarily having reference to a boat, our
definition will not be appropriate, for the rudder does not have
this reference to a boat qua boat, as there are boats which have no
rudders. Thus we cannot use the terms reciprocally, for the word
'boat' cannot be said to find its explanation in the word 'rudder'. As
there is no existing word, our definition would perhaps be more
accurate if we coined some word like 'ruddered' as the correlative
of 'rudder'. If we express ourselves thus accurately, at any rate
the terms are reciprocally connected, for the 'ruddered' thing is
'ruddered' in virtue of its rudder. So it is in all other cases. A
head will be more accurately defined as the correlative of that
which is 'headed', than as that of an animal, for the animal does
not have a head qua animal, since many animals have no head.

Thus we may perhaps most easily comprehend that to which a thing
is related, when a name does not exist, if, from that which has a
name, we derive a new name, and apply it to that with which the
first is reciprocally connected, as in the aforesaid instances, when
we derived the word 'winged' from 'wing' and from 'rudder'.

All relatives, then, if properly defined, have a correlative. I
add this condition because, if that to which they are related is
stated as haphazard and not accurately, the two are not found to be
interdependent. Let me state what I mean more clearly. Even in the
case of acknowledged correlatives, and where names exist for each,
there will be no interdependence if one of the two is denoted, not
by that name which expresses the correlative notion, but by one of
irrelevant significance. The term 'slave,' if defined as related,
not to a master, but to a man, or a biped, or anything of that sort,
is not reciprocally connected with that in relation to which it is
defined, for the statement is not exact. Further, if one thing is said
to be correlative with another, and the terminology used is correct,
then, though all irrelevant attributes should be removed, and only
that one attribute left in virtue of which it was correctly stated
to be correlative with that other, the stated correlation will still
exist. If the correlative of 'the slave' is said to be 'the master',
then, though all irrelevant attributes of the said 'master', such as
'biped', 'receptive of knowledge', 'human', should be removed, and the
attribute 'master' alone left, the stated correlation existing between
him and the slave will remain the same, for it is of a master that a
slave is said to be the slave. On the other hand, if, of two
correlatives, one is not correctly termed, then, when all other
attributes are removed and that alone is left in virtue of which it
was stated to be correlative, the stated correlation will be found
to have disappeared.

For suppose the correlative of 'the slave' should be said to be 'the
man', or the correlative of 'the wing"the bird'; if the attribute
'master' be withdrawn from' the man', the correlation between 'the
man' and 'the slave' will cease to exist, for if the man is not a
master, the slave is not a slave. Similarly, if the attribute 'winged'
be withdrawn from 'the bird', 'the wing' will no longer be relative;
for if the so-called correlative is not winged, it follows that 'the
wing' has no correlative.

Thus it is essential that the correlated terms should be exactly
designated; if there is a name existing, the statement will be easy;
if not, it is doubtless our duty to construct names. When the
terminology is thus correct, it is evident that all correlatives are
interdependent.

Correlatives are thought to come into existence simultaneously. This
is for the most part true, as in the case of the double and the
half. The existence of the half necessitates the existence of that
of which it is a half. Similarly the existence of a master
necessitates the existence of a slave, and that of a slave implies
that of a master; these are merely instances of a general rule.
Moreover, they cancel one another; for if there is no double it
follows that there is no half, and vice versa; this rule also
applies to all such correlatives. Yet it does not appear to be true in
all cases that correlatives come into existence simultaneously. The
object of knowledge would appear to exist before knowledge itself, for
it is usually the case that we acquire knowledge of objects already
existing; it would be difficult, if not impossible, to find a branch
of knowledge the beginning of the existence of which was
contemporaneous with that of its object.

Again, while the object of knowledge, if it ceases to exist, cancels
at the same time the knowledge which was its correlative, the converse
of this is not true. It is true that if the object of knowledge does
not exist there can be no knowledge: for there will no longer be
anything to know. Yet it is equally true that, if knowledge of a
certain object does not exist, the object may nevertheless quite
well exist. Thus, in the case of the squaring of the circle, if indeed
that process is an object of knowledge, though it itself exists as
an object of knowledge, yet the knowledge of it has not yet come
into existence. Again, if all animals ceased to exist, there would
be no knowledge, but there might yet be many objects of knowledge.

This is likewise the case with regard to perception: for the
object of perception is, it appears, prior to the act of perception.
If the perceptible is annihilated, perception also will cease to
exist; but the annihilation of perception does not cancel the
existence of the perceptible. For perception implies a body
perceived and a body in which perception takes place. Now if that
which is perceptible is annihilated, it follows that the body is
annihilated, for the body is a perceptible thing; and if the body does
not exist, it follows that perception also ceases to exist. Thus the
annihilation of the perceptible involves that of perception.

But the annihilation of perception does not involve that of the
perceptible. For if the animal is annihilated, it follows that
perception also is annihilated, but perceptibles such as body, heat,
sweetness, bitterness, and so on, will remain.

Again, perception is generated at the same time as the perceiving
subject, for it comes into existence at the same time as the animal.
But the perceptible surely exists before perception; for fire and
water and such elements, out of which the animal is itself composed,
exist before the animal is an animal at all, and before perception.
Thus it would seem that the perceptible exists before perception.

It may be questioned whether it is true that no substance is
relative, as seems to be the case, or whether exception is to be
made in the case of certain secondary substances. With regard to
primary substances, it is quite true that there is no such
possibility, for neither wholes nor parts of primary substances are
relative. The individual man or ox is not defined with reference to
something external. Similarly with the parts: a particular hand or
head is not defined as a particular hand or head of a particular
person, but as the hand or head of a particular person. It is true
also, for the most part at least, in the case of secondary substances;
the species 'man' and the species 'ox' are not defined with
reference to anything outside themselves. Wood, again, is only
relative in so far as it is some one's property, not in so far as it
is wood. It is plain, then, that in the cases mentioned substance is
not relative. But with regard to some secondary substances there is
a difference of opinion; thus, such terms as 'head' and 'hand' are
defined with reference to that of which the things indicated are a
part, and so it comes about that these appear to have a relative
character. Indeed, if our definition of that which is relative was
complete, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to prove that no
substance is relative. If, however, our definition was not complete,
if those things only are properly called relative in the case of which
relation to an external object is a necessary condition of
existence, perhaps some explanation of the dilemma may be found.

The former definition does indeed apply to all relatives, but the
fact that a thing is explained with reference to something else does
not make it essentially relative.

From this it is plain that, if a man definitely apprehends a
relative thing, he will also definitely apprehend that to which it
is relative. Indeed this is self-evident: for if a man knows that some
particular thing is relative, assuming that we call that a relative in
the case of which relation to something is a necessary condition of
existence, he knows that also to which it is related. For if he does
not know at all that to which it is related, he will not know
whether or not it is relative. This is clear, moreover, in
particular instances. If a man knows definitely that such and such a
thing is 'double', he will also forthwith know definitely that of
which it is the double. For if there is nothing definite of which he
knows it to be the double, he does not know at all that it is
double. Again, if he knows that a thing is more beautiful, it
follows necessarily that he will forthwith definitely know that also
than which it is more beautiful. He will not merely know
indefinitely that it is more beautiful than something which is less
beautiful, for this would be supposition, not knowledge. For if he
does not know definitely that than which it is more beautiful, he
can no longer claim to know definitely that it is more beautiful
than something else which is less beautiful: for it might be that
nothing was less beautiful. It is, therefore, evident that if a man
apprehends some relative thing definitely, he necessarily knows that
also definitely to which it is related.

Now the head, the hand, and such things are substances, and it is
possible to know their essential character definitely, but it does not
necessarily follow that we should know that to which they are related.
It is not possible to know forthwith whose head or hand is meant. Thus
these are not relatives, and, this being the case, it would be true to
say that no substance is relative in character. It is perhaps a
difficult matter, in such cases, to make a positive statement
without more exhaustive examination, but to have raised questions with
regard to details is not without advantage.

8

By 'quality' I mean that in virtue of which people are said to be
such and such.

Quality is a term that is used in many senses. One sort of quality
let us call 'habit' or 'disposition'. Habit differs from disposition
in being more lasting and more firmly established. The various kinds
of knowledge and of virtue are habits, for knowledge, even when
acquired only in a moderate degree, is, it is agreed, abiding in its
character and difficult to displace, unless some great mental upheaval
takes place, through disease or any such cause. The virtues, also,
such as justice, self-restraint, and so on, are not easily dislodged
or dismissed, so as to give place to vice.

By a disposition, on the other hand, we mean a condition that is
easily changed and quickly gives place to its opposite. Thus, heat,
cold, disease, health, and so on are dispositions. For a man is
disposed in one way or another with reference to these, but quickly
changes, becoming cold instead of warm, ill instead of well. So it
is with all other dispositions also, unless through lapse of time a
disposition has itself become inveterate and almost impossible to
dislodge: in which case we should perhaps go so far as to call it a
habit.

It is evident that men incline to call those conditions habits which
are of a more or less permanent type and difficult to displace; for
those who are not retentive of knowledge, but volatile, are not said
to have such and such a 'habit' as regards knowledge, yet they are
disposed, we may say, either better or worse, towards knowledge.
Thus habit differs from disposition in this, that while the latter
in ephemeral, the former is permanent and difficult to alter.

Habits are at the same time dispositions, but dispositions are not
necessarily habits. For those who have some specific habit may be said
also, in virtue of that habit, to be thus or thus disposed; but
those who are disposed in some specific way have not in all cases
the corresponding habit.

Another sort of quality is that in virtue of which, for example,
we call men good boxers or runners, or healthy or sickly: in fact it
includes all those terms which refer to inborn capacity or incapacity.
Such things are not predicated of a person in virtue of his
disposition, but in virtue of his inborn capacity or incapacity to
do something with ease or to avoid defeat of any kind. Persons are
called good boxers or good runners, not in virtue of such and such a
disposition, but in virtue of an inborn capacity to accomplish
something with ease. Men are called healthy in virtue of the inborn
capacity of easy resistance to those unhealthy influences that may
ordinarily arise; unhealthy, in virtue of the lack of this capacity.
Similarly with regard to softness and hardness. Hardness is predicated
of a thing because it has that capacity of resistance which enables it
to withstand disintegration; softness, again, is predicated of a thing
by reason of the lack of that capacity.

A third class within this category is that of affective qualities
and affections. Sweetness, bitterness, sourness, are examples of
this sort of quality, together with all that is akin to these; heat,
moreover, and cold, whiteness, and blackness are affective
qualities. It is evident that these are qualities, for those things
that possess them are themselves said to be such and such by reason of
their presence. Honey is called sweet because it contains sweetness;
the body is called white because it contains whiteness; and so in
all other cases.

The term 'affective quality' is not used as indicating that those
things which admit these qualities are affected in any way. Honey is
not called sweet because it is affected in a specific way, nor is this
what is meant in any other instance. Similarly heat and cold are
called affective qualities, not because those things which admit
them are affected. What is meant is that these said qualities are
capable of producing an 'affection' in the way of perception. For
sweetness has the power of affecting the sense of taste; heat, that of
touch; and so it is with the rest of these qualities.

Whiteness and blackness, however, and the other colours, are not
said to be affective qualities in this sense, but -because they
themselves are the results of an affection. It is plain that many
changes of colour take place because of affections. When a man is
ashamed, he blushes; when he is afraid, he becomes pale, and so on. So
true is this, that when a man is by nature liable to such
affections, arising from some concomitance of elements in his
constitution, it is a probable inference that he has the corresponding
complexion of skin. For the same disposition of bodily elements, which
in the former instance was momentarily present in the case of an
access of shame, might be a result of a man's natural temperament,
so as to produce the corresponding colouring also as a natural
characteristic. All conditions, therefore, of this kind, if caused
by certain permanent and lasting affections, are called affective
qualities. For pallor and duskiness of complexion are called
qualities, inasmuch as we are said to be such and such in virtue of
them, not only if they originate in natural constitution, but also
if they come about through long disease or sunburn, and are
difficult to remove, or indeed remain throughout life. For in the same
way we are said to be such and such because of these.

Those conditions, however, which arise from causes which may
easily be rendered ineffective or speedily removed, are called, not
qualities, but affections: for we are not said to be such virtue of
them. The man who blushes through shame is not said to be a
constitutional blusher, nor is the man who becomes pale through fear
said to be constitutionally pale. He is said rather to have been
affected.

Thus such conditions are called affections, not qualities.

In like manner there are affective qualities and affections of the
soul. That temper with which a man is born and which has its origin in
certain deep-seated affections is called a quality. I mean such
conditions as insanity, irascibility, and so on: for people are said
to be mad or irascible in virtue of these. Similarly those abnormal
psychic states which are not inborn, but arise from the concomitance
of certain other elements, and are difficult to remove, or
altogether permanent, are called qualities, for in virtue of them
men are said to be such and such.

Those, however, which arise from causes easily rendered
ineffective are called affections, not qualities. Suppose that a man
is irritable when vexed: he is not even spoken of as a bad-tempered
man, when in such circumstances he loses his temper somewhat, but
rather is said to be affected. Such conditions are therefore termed,
not qualities, but affections.

The fourth sort of quality is figure and the shape that belongs to a
thing; and besides this, straightness and curvedness and any other
qualities of this type; each of these defines a thing as being such
and such. Because it is triangular or quadrangular a thing is said
to have a specific character, or again because it is straight or
curved; in fact a thing's shape in every case gives rise to a
qualification of it.

Rarity and density, roughness and smoothness, seem to be terms
indicating quality: yet these, it would appear, really belong to a
class different from that of quality. For it is rather a certain
relative position of the parts composing the thing thus qualified
which, it appears, is indicated by each of these terms. A thing is
dense, owing to the fact that its parts are closely combined with
one another; rare, because there are interstices between the parts;
smooth, because its parts lie, so to speak, evenly; rough, because
some parts project beyond others.

There may be other sorts of quality, but those that are most
properly so called have, we may safely say, been enumerated.

These, then, are qualities, and the things that take their name from
them as derivatives, or are in some other way dependent on them, are
said to be qualified in some specific way. In most, indeed in almost
all cases, the name of that which is qualified is derived from that of
the quality. Thus the terms 'whiteness', 'grammar', 'justice', give us
the adjectives 'white', 'grammatical', 'just', and so on.

There are some cases, however, in which, as the quality under
consideration has no name, it is impossible that those possessed of it
should have a name that is derivative. For instance, the name given to
the runner or boxer, who is so called in virtue of an inborn capacity,
is not derived from that of any quality; for lob those capacities have
no name assigned to them. In this, the inborn capacity is distinct
from the science, with reference to which men are called, e.g.
boxers or wrestlers. Such a science is classed as a disposition; it
has a name, and is called 'boxing' or 'wrestling' as the case may
be, and the name given to those disposed in this way is derived from
that of the science. Sometimes, even though a name exists for the
quality, that which takes its character from the quality has a name
that is not a derivative. For instance, the upright man takes his
character from the possession of the quality of integrity, but the
name given him is not derived from the word 'integrity'. Yet this does
not occur often.

We may therefore state that those things are said to be possessed of
some specific quality which have a name derived from that of the
aforesaid quality, or which are in some other way dependent on it.

One quality may be the contrary of another; thus justice is the
contrary of injustice, whiteness of blackness, and so on. The
things, also, which are said to be such and such in virtue of these
qualities, may be contrary the one to the other; for that which is
unjust is contrary to that which is just, that which is white to
that which is black. This, however, is not always the case. Red,
yellow, and such colours, though qualities, have no contraries.

If one of two contraries is a quality, the other will also be a
quality. This will be evident from particular instances, if we apply
the names
used to denote the other categories; for instance, granted that
justice is the contrary of injustice and justice is a quality,
injustice will also be a quality: neither quantity, nor relation,
nor place, nor indeed any other category but that of quality, will
be applicable properly to injustice. So it is with all other
contraries falling under the category of quality.

Qualities admit of variation of degree. Whiteness is predicated of
one thing in a greater or less degree than of another. This is also
the case with reference to justice. Moreover, one and the same thing
may exhibit a quality in a greater degree than it did before: if a
thing is white, it may become whiter.

Though this is generally the case, there are exceptions. For if we
should say that justice admitted of variation of degree,
difficulties might ensue, and this is true with regard to all those
qualities which are dispositions. There are some, indeed, who
dispute the possibility of variation here. They maintain that
justice and health cannot very well admit of variation of degree
themselves, but that people vary in the degree in which they possess
these qualities, and that this is the case with grammatical learning
and all those qualities which are classed as dispositions. However
that may be, it is an incontrovertible fact that the things which in
virtue of these qualities are said to be what they are vary in the
degree in which they possess them; for one man is said to be better
versed in grammar, or more healthy or just, than another, and so on.

The qualities expressed by the terms 'triangular' and 'quadrangular'
do not appear to admit of variation of degree, nor indeed do any
that have to do with figure. For those things to which the
definition of the triangle or circle is applicable are all equally
triangular or circular. Those, on the other hand, to which the same
definition is not applicable, cannot be said to differ from one
another in degree; the square is no more a circle than the
rectangle, for to neither is the definition of the circle appropriate.
In short, if the definition of the term proposed is not applicable
to both objects, they cannot be compared. Thus it is not all qualities
which admit of variation of degree.

Whereas none of the characteristics I have mentioned are peculiar to
quality, the fact that likeness and unlikeness can be predicated
with reference to quality only, gives to that category its distinctive
feature. One thing is like another only with reference to that in
virtue of which it is such and such; thus this forms the peculiar mark
of quality.

We must not be disturbed because it may be argued that, though
proposing to discuss the category of quality, we have included in it
many relative terms. We did say that habits and dispositions were
relative. In practically all such cases the genus is relative, the
individual not. Thus knowledge, as a genus, is explained by
reference to something else, for we mean a knowledge of something. But
particular branches of knowledge are not thus explained. The knowledge
of grammar is not relative to anything external, nor is the
knowledge of music, but these, if relative at all, are relative only
in virtue of their genera; thus grammar is said be the knowledge of
something, not the grammar of something; similarly music is the
knowledge of something, not the music of something.

Thus individual branches of knowledge are not relative. And it is
because we possess these individual branches of knowledge that we
are said to be such and such. It is these that we actually possess: we
are called experts because we possess knowledge in some particular
branch. Those particular branches, therefore, of knowledge, in
virtue of which we are sometimes said to be such and such, are
themselves qualities, and are not relative. Further, if anything
should happen to fall within both the category of quality and that
of relation, there would be nothing extraordinary in classing it under
both these heads.

9

Action and affection both admit of contraries and also of
variation of degree. Heating is the contrary of cooling, being
heated of being cooled, being glad of being vexed. Thus they admit
of contraries. They also admit of variation of degree: for it is
possible to heat in a greater or less degree; also to be heated in a
greater or less degree. Thus action and affection also admit of
variation of degree. So much, then, is stated with regard to these
categories.

We spoke, moreover, of the category of position when we were dealing
with that of relation, and stated that such terms derived their
names from those of the corresponding attitudes.

As for the rest, time, place, state, since they are easily
intelligible, I say no more about them than was said at the beginning,
that in the category of state are included such states as 'shod',
'armed', in that of place 'in the Lyceum' and so on, as was
explained before.

10

The proposed categories have, then, been adequately dealt with.

We must next explain the various senses in which the term 'opposite'
is used. Things are said to be opposed in four senses: (i) as
correlatives to one another, (ii) as contraries to one another,
(iii) as privatives to positives, (iv) as affirmatives to negatives.

Let me sketch my meaning in outline. An instance of the use of the
word 'opposite' with reference to correlatives is afforded by the
expressions 'double' and 'half'; with reference to contraries by 'bad'
and 'good'. Opposites in the sense of 'privatives' and 'positives'
are' blindness' and 'sight'; in the sense of affirmatives and
negatives, the propositions 'he sits', 'he does not sit'.

(i) Pairs of opposites which fall under the category of relation are
explained by a reference of the one to the other, the reference
being indicated by the preposition 'of' or by some other
preposition. Thus, double is a relative term, for that which is double
is explained as the double of something. Knowledge, again, is the
opposite of the thing known, in the same sense; and the thing known
also is explained by its relation to its opposite, knowledge. For
the thing known is explained as that which is known by something, that
is, by knowledge. Such things, then, as are opposite the one to the
other in the sense of being correlatives are explained by a
reference of the one to the other.

(ii) Pairs of opposites which are contraries are not in any way
interdependent, but are contrary the one to the other. The good is not
spoken of as the good of the had, but as the contrary of the bad,
nor is white spoken of as the white of the black, but as the
contrary of the black. These two types of opposition are therefore
distinct. Those contraries which are such that the subjects in which
they are naturally present, or of which they are predicated, must
necessarily contain either the one or the other of them, have no
intermediate, but those in the case of which no such necessity
obtains, always have an intermediate. Thus disease and health are
naturally present in the body of an animal, and it is necessary that
either the one or the other should be present in the body of an
animal. Odd and even, again, are predicated of number, and it is
necessary that the one or the other should be present in numbers.
Now there is no intermediate between the terms of either of these
two pairs. On the other hand, in those contraries with regard to which
no such necessity obtains, we find an intermediate. Blackness and
whiteness are naturally present in the body, but it is not necessary
that either the one or the other should be present in the body,
inasmuch as it is not true to say that everybody must be white or
black. Badness and goodness, again, are predicated of man, and of many
other things, but it is not necessary that either the one quality or
the other should be present in that of which they are predicated: it
is not true to say that everything that may be good or bad must be
either good or bad. These pairs of contraries have intermediates:
the intermediates between white and black are grey, sallow, and all
the other colours that come between; the intermediate between good and
bad is that which is neither the one nor the other.

Some intermediate qualities have names, such as grey and sallow
and all the other colours that come between white and black; in
other cases, however, it is not easy to name the intermediate, but
we must define it as that which is not either extreme, as in the
case of that which is neither good nor bad, neither just nor unjust.

(iii) 'privatives' and 'Positives' have reference to the same
subject. Thus, sight and blindness have reference to the eye. It is
a universal rule that each of a pair of opposites of this type has
reference to that to which the particular 'positive' is natural. We
say that that is capable of some particular faculty or possession
has suffered privation when the faculty or possession in question is
in no way present in that in which, and at the time at which, it
should naturally be present. We do not call that toothless which has
not teeth, or that blind which has not sight, but rather that which
has not teeth or sight at the time when by nature it should. For there
are some creatures which from birth are without sight, or without
teeth, but these are not called toothless or blind.

To be without some faculty or to possess it is not the same as the
corresponding 'privative' or 'positive'. 'Sight' is a 'positive',
'blindness' a 'privative', but 'to possess sight' is not equivalent to
'sight', 'to be blind' is not equivalent to 'blindness'. Blindness
is a 'privative', to be blind is to be in a state of privation, but is
not a 'privative'. Moreover, if 'blindness' were equivalent to
'being blind', both would be predicated of the same subject; but
though a man is said to be blind, he is by no means said to be
blindness.

To be in a state of 'possession' is, it appears, the opposite of
being in a state of 'privation', just as 'positives' and
'privatives' themselves are opposite. There is the same type of
antithesis in both cases; for just as blindness is opposed to sight,
so is being blind opposed to having sight.

That which is affirmed or denied is not itself affirmation or
denial. By 'affirmation' we mean an affirmative proposition, by
'denial' a negative. Now, those facts which form the matter of the
affirmation or denial are not propositions; yet these two are said
to be opposed in the same sense as the affirmation and denial, for
in this case also the type of antithesis is the same. For as the
affirmation is opposed to the denial, as in the two propositions 'he
sits', 'he does not sit', so also the fact which constitutes the
matter of the proposition in one case is opposed to that in the other,
his sitting, that is to say, to his not sitting.

It is evident that 'positives' and 'privatives' are not opposed each
to each in the same sense as relatives. The one is not explained by
reference to the other; sight is not sight of blindness, nor is any
other preposition used to indicate the relation. Similarly blindness
is not said to be blindness of sight, but rather, privation of
sight. Relatives, moreover, reciprocate; if blindness, therefore, were
a relative, there would be a reciprocity of relation between it and
that with which it was correlative. But this is not the case. Sight is
not called the sight of blindness.

That those terms which fall under the heads of 'positives' and
'privatives' are not opposed each to each as contraries, either, is
plain from the following facts: Of a pair of contraries such that they
have no intermediate, one or the other must needs be present in the
subject in which they naturally subsist, or of which they are
predicated; for it is those, as we proved,' in the case of which
this necessity obtains, that have no intermediate. Moreover, we
cited health and disease, odd and even, as instances. But those
contraries which have an intermediate are not subject to any such
necessity. It is not necessary that every substance, receptive of such
qualities, should be either black or white, cold or hot, for something
intermediate between these contraries may very well be present in
the subject. We proved, moreover, that those contraries have an
intermediate in the case of which the said necessity does not
obtain. Yet when one of the two contraries is a constitutive
property of the subject, as it is a constitutive property of fire to
be hot, of snow to be white, it is necessary determinately that one of
the two contraries, not one or the other, should be present in the
subject; for fire cannot be cold, or snow black. Thus, it is not the
case here that one of the two must needs be present in every subject
receptive of these qualities, but only in that subject of which the
one forms a constitutive property. Moreover, in such cases it is one
member of the pair determinately, and not either the one or the other,
which must be present.

In the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', on the other hand,
neither of the aforesaid statements holds good. For it is not
necessary that a subject receptive of the qualities should always have
either the one or the other; that which has not yet advanced to the
state when sight is natural is not said either to be blind or to
see. Thus 'positives' and 'privatives' do not belong to that class
of contraries which consists of those which have no intermediate. On
the other hand, they do not belong either to that class which consists
of contraries which have an intermediate. For under certain conditions
it is necessary that either the one or the other should form part of
the constitution of every appropriate subject. For when a thing has
reached the stage when it is by nature capable of sight, it will be
said either to see or to be blind, and that in an indeterminate sense,
signifying that the capacity may be either present or absent; for it
is not necessary either that it should see or that it should be blind,
but that it should be either in the one state or in the other. Yet
in the case of those contraries which have an intermediate we found
that it was never necessary that either the one or the other should be
present in every appropriate subject, but only that in certain
subjects one of the pair should be present, and that in a
determinate sense. It is, therefore, plain that 'positives' and
'privatives' are not opposed each to each in either of the senses in
which contraries are opposed.

Again, in the case of contraries, it is possible that there should
be changes from either into the other, while the subject retains its
identity, unless indeed one of the contraries is a constitutive
property of that subject, as heat is of fire. For it is possible
that that that which is healthy should become diseased, that which
is white, black, that which is cold, hot, that which is good, bad,
that which is bad, good. The bad man, if he is being brought into a
better way of life and thought, may make some advance, however slight,
and if he should once improve, even ever so little, it is plain that
he might change completely, or at any rate make very great progress;
for a man becomes more and more easily moved to virtue, however
small the improvement was at first. It is, therefore, natural to
suppose that he will make yet greater progress than he has made in the
past; and as this process goes on, it will change him completely and
establish him in the contrary state, provided he is not hindered by
lack of time. In the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', however,
change in both directions is impossible. There may be a change from
possession to privation, but not from privation to possession. The man
who has become blind does not regain his sight; the man who has become
bald does not regain his hair; the man who has lost his teeth does not
grow his grow a new set. (iv) Statements opposed as affirmation and
negation belong manifestly to a class which is distinct, for in this
case, and in this case only, it is necessary for the one opposite to
be true and the other false.

Neither in the case of contraries, nor in the case of
correlatives, nor in the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', is it
necessary for one to be true and the other false. Health and disease
are contraries: neither of them is true or false. 'Double' and
'half' are opposed to each other as correlatives: neither of them is
true or false. The case is the same, of course, with regard to
'positives' and 'privatives' such as 'sight' and 'blindness'. In
short, where there is no sort of combination of words, truth and
falsity have no place, and all the opposites we have mentioned so
far consist of simple words.

At the same time, when the words which enter into opposed statements
are contraries, these, more than any other set of opposites, would
seem to claim this characteristic. 'Socrates is ill' is the contrary
of 'Socrates is well', but not even of such composite expressions is
it true to say that one of the pair must always be true and the
other false. For if Socrates exists, one will be true and the other
false, but if he does not exist, both will be false; for neither
'Socrates is ill' nor 'Socrates is well' is true, if Socrates does not
exist at all.

In the case of 'positives' and 'privatives', if the subject does not
exist at all, neither proposition is true, but even if the subject
exists, it is not always the fact that one is true and the other
false. For 'Socrates has sight' is the opposite of 'Socrates is blind'
in the sense of the word 'opposite' which applies to possession and
privation. Now if Socrates exists, it is not necessary that one should
be true and the other false, for when he is not yet able to acquire
the power of vision, both are false, as also if Socrates is altogether
non-existent.

But in the case of affirmation and negation, whether the subject
exists or not, one is always false and the other true. For manifestly,
if Socrates exists, one of the two propositions 'Socrates is ill',
'Socrates is not ill', is true, and the other false. This is
likewise the case if he does not exist; for if he does not exist, to
say that he is ill is false, to say that he is not ill is true. Thus
it is in the case of those opposites only, which are opposite in the
sense in which the term is used with reference to affirmation and
negation, that the rule holds good, that one of the pair must be
true and the other false.

11

That the contrary of a good is an evil is shown by induction: the
contrary of health is disease, of courage, cowardice, and so on. But
the contrary of an evil is sometimes a good, sometimes an evil. For
defect, which is an evil, has excess for its contrary, this also being
an evil, and the mean. which is a good, is equally the contrary of the
one and of the other. It is only in a few cases, however, that we
see instances of this: in most, the contrary of an evil is a good.

In the case of contraries, it is not always necessary that if one
exists the other should also exist: for if all become healthy there
will be health and no disease, and again, if everything turns white,
there will be white, but no black. Again, since the fact that Socrates
is ill is the contrary of the fact that Socrates is well, and two
contrary conditions cannot both obtain in one and the same
individual at the same time, both these contraries could not exist
at once: for if that Socrates was well was a fact, then that
Socrates was ill could not possibly be one.

It is plain that contrary attributes must needs be present in
subjects which belong to the same species or genus. Disease and health
require as their subject the body of an animal; white and black
require a body, without further qualification; justice and injustice
require as their subject the human soul.

Moreover, it is necessary that pairs of contraries should in all
cases either belong to the same genus or belong to contrary genera
or be themselves genera. White and black belong to the same genus,
colour; justice and injustice, to contrary genera, virtue and vice;
while good and evil do not belong to genera, but are themselves actual
genera, with terms under them.

12

There are four senses in which one thing can be said to be 'prior'
to another. Primarily and most properly the term has reference to
time: in this sense the word is used to indicate that one thing is
older or more ancient than another, for the expressions 'older' and
'more ancient' imply greater length of time.

Secondly, one thing is said to be 'prior' to another when the
sequence of their being cannot be reversed. In this sense 'one' is
'prior' to 'two'. For if 'two' exists, it follows directly that
'one' must exist, but if 'one' exists, it does not follow
necessarily that 'two' exists: thus the sequence subsisting cannot
be reversed. It is agreed, then, that when the sequence of two
things cannot be reversed, then that one on which the other depends is
called 'prior' to that other.

In the third place, the term 'prior' is used with reference to any
order, as in the case of science and of oratory. For in sciences which
use demonstration there is that which is prior and that which is
posterior in order; in geometry, the elements are prior to the
propositions; in reading and writing, the letters of the alphabet
are prior to the syllables. Similarly, in the case of speeches, the
exordium is prior in order to the narrative.

Besides these senses of the word, there is a fourth. That which is
better and more honourable is said to have a natural priority. In
common parlance men speak of those whom they honour and love as
'coming first' with them. This sense of the word is perhaps the most
far-fetched.

Such, then, are the different senses in which the term 'prior' is
used.

Yet it would seem that besides those mentioned there is yet another.
For in those things, the being of each of which implies that of the
other, that which is in any way the cause may reasonably be said to be
by nature 'prior' to the effect. It is plain that there are
instances of this. The fact of the being of a man carries with it
the truth of the proposition that he is, and the implication is
reciprocal: for if a man is, the proposition wherein we allege that he
is true, and conversely, if the proposition wherein we allege that
he is true, then he is. The true proposition, however, is in no way
the cause of the being of the man, but the fact of the man's being
does seem somehow to be the cause of the truth of the proposition, for
the truth or falsity of the proposition depends on the fact of the
man's being or not being.

Thus the word 'prior' may be used in five senses.

13

The term 'simultaneous' is primarily and most appropriately
applied to those things the genesis of the one of which is
simultaneous with that of the other; for in such cases neither is
prior or posterior to the other. Such things are said to be
simultaneous in point of time. Those things, again, are 'simultaneous'
in point of nature, the being of each of which involves that of the
other, while at the same time neither is the cause of the other's
being. This is the case with regard to the double and the half, for
these are reciprocally dependent, since, if there is a double, there
is also a half, and if there is a half, there is also a double,
while at the same time neither is the cause of the being of the other.

Again, those species which are distinguished one from another and
opposed one to another within the same genus are said to be
'simultaneous' in nature. I mean those species which are
distinguished each from each by one and the same method of division.
Thus the 'winged' species is simultaneous with the 'terrestrial' and
the 'water' species. These are distinguished within the same genus,
and are opposed each to each, for the genus 'animal' has the 'winged',
the 'terrestrial', and the 'water' species, and no one of these is
prior or posterior to another; on the contrary, all such things appear
to be 'simultaneous' in nature. Each of these also, the terrestrial,
the winged, and the water species, can be divided again into
subspecies. Those species, then, also will be 'simultaneous' point
of nature, which, belonging to the same genus, are distinguished
each from each by one and the same method of differentiation.

But genera are prior to species, for the sequence of their being
cannot be reversed. If there is the species 'water-animal', there will
be the genus 'animal', but granted the being of the genus 'animal', it
does not follow necessarily that there will be the species
'water-animal'.

Those things, therefore, are said to be 'simultaneous' in nature,
the being of each of which involves that of the other, while at the
same time neither is in any way the cause of the other's being;
those species, also, which are distinguished each from each and
opposed within the same genus. Those things, moreover, are
'simultaneous' in the unqualified sense of the word which come into
being at the same time.

14

There are six sorts of movement: generation, destruction,
increase, diminution, alteration, and change of place.

It is evident in all but one case that all these sorts of movement
are distinct each from each. Generation is distinct from
destruction, increase and change of place from diminution, and so
on. But in the case of alteration it may be argued that the process
necessarily implies one or other of the other five sorts of motion.
This is not true, for we may say that all affections, or nearly all,
produce in us an alteration which is distinct from all other sorts
of motion, for that which is affected need not suffer either
increase or diminution or any of the other sorts of motion. Thus
alteration is a distinct sort of motion; for, if it were not, the
thing altered would not only be altered, but would forthwith
necessarily suffer increase or diminution or some one of the other
sorts of motion in addition; which as a matter of fact is not the
case. Similarly that which was undergoing the process of increase or
was subject to some other sort of motion would, if alteration were not
a distinct form of motion, necessarily be subject to alteration
also. But there are some things which undergo increase but yet not
alteration. The square, for instance, if a gnomon is applied to it,
undergoes increase but not alteration, and so it is with all other
figures of this sort. Alteration and increase, therefore, are
distinct.

Speaking generally, rest is the contrary of motion. But the
different forms of motion have their own contraries in other forms;
thus destruction is the contrary of generation, diminution of
increase, rest in a place, of change of place. As for this last,
change in the reverse direction would seem to be most truly its
contrary; thus motion upwards is the contrary of motion downwards
and vice versa.

In the case of that sort of motion which yet remains, of those
that have been enumerated, it is not easy to state what is its
contrary. It appears to have no contrary, unless one should define the
contrary here also either as 'rest in its quality' or as 'change in
the direction of the contrary quality', just as we defined the
contrary of change of place either as rest in a place or as change
in the reverse direction. For a thing is altered when change of
quality takes place; therefore either rest in its quality or change in
the direction of the contrary may be called the contrary of this
qualitative form of motion. In this way becoming white is the contrary
of becoming black; there is alteration in the contrary direction,
since a change of a qualitative nature takes place.

15

The term 'to have' is used in various senses. In the first place
it is used with reference to habit or disposition or any other
quality, for we are said to 'have' a piece of knowledge or a virtue.
Then, again, it has reference to quantity, as, for instance, in the
case of a man's height; for he is said to 'have' a height of three
or four cubits. It is used, moreover, with regard to apparel, a man
being said to 'have' a coat or tunic; or in respect of something which
we have on a part of ourselves, as a ring on the hand: or in respect
of something which is a part of us, as hand or foot. The term refers
also to content, as in the case of a vessel and wheat, or of a jar and
wine; a jar is said to 'have' wine, and a corn-measure wheat. The
expression in such cases has reference to content. Or it refers to
that which has been acquired; we are said to 'have' a house or a
field. A man is also said to 'have' a wife, and a wife a husband,
and this appears to be the most remote meaning of the term, for by the
use of it we mean simply that the husband lives with the wife.

Other senses of the word might perhaps be found, but the most
ordinary ones have all been enumerated.

-THE END-
.
